- Green e® Renewable Energy 
Standard for Canada and the 
United States 
- Version 4.4 
- Center for Resource Solutions 
1012 Torney Ave. 2nd Floor 
San Francisco, CA 94129 
www.resource solutions.org 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 2 CONTENTS 
I. INTRODUCTION 3 
II. ELIGIBLE SOURCES OF SUPPLY 3 
A. Definition of Eligible Renewables 3 
B. Co firing of Biomass with Non Renewables 7 
C. Emissions Limits on Biomass 8 
D. Emissions Criteria for the Non Renewable Portion of a Green e® Energy Product 8 
E. New Renewables 8 
F. Energy Storage 10 
G. Parasitic Load . 10 
H. Long Term Contracts for Supply and Sale 10 
I. Extended Use Criteria for On Site and Direct Line Generation 11 
III. PRODUCT SPECIFICATIONS 12 
A. Minimum Purchase Quantity 12 
B. Vintage of Eligible Renewables . 12 
C. Fully Aggregated Renewables 12 
D. Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) Renewables, Other Mandated Renewables, and 
Financial Incentives 13 
E. Double Counting and Use of Utility Resources 14 
F. Customer Sited Facilities 15 
G. Location of Eligible Generation Facilities 15 
H. Tracking System Use 16 
IV. ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR ELECTRICITY PRODUCTS 17 
A. Geographic Eligibility for Electricity Products 17 
B. Use of Renewable Energy Certificates in an Electricity Product 17 
C. Products Contracting Supply from Portions of Specific Facilities to Individual 
Customers 18 
V. ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR REGULATED UTILITY PRODUCTS 18 
A. Product Pricing 18 
B. Marketing and Performance Targets 19 
C. Waitlists for Green Pricing Products 19 
D. Regulatory Approval 19 
E. Tariffs with Long Term Contract Options 19 
F. Utility Products Serving Multiple Utilities (Hub and Spoke) 20 
VI. REVISIONS TO THIS STANDARD 21 
APPENDIX A: STATE SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS 23 
A.1 Texas 23 
A.2 RGGI State Set Aside (CT, DE, ME, MD, MA, NH, NJ, NY, RI, VT) 25 
A.3 Hawaii 31 
A.4 Michigan 32 
A.5 California Greenhouse Gas Cap andTrade 33 
A.6 Arizona 38 
A.7 Quebec Greenhouse Gas Cap andTrade 39 
A.8 Washington Greenhouse Gas Cap andTrade 41 
A.9 North Carolina 42 
A.10 Oregon 42 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 3 I. INTRODUCTION 
- This is the Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
(“Standard ”) for renewable electricity products in all regions of the United States 
(defined as the fifty States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana 
Islands, and associated territorial waters and airspace ) and Canada . This Standard 
defines minimum require ments for renewable electricity and renewable energy 
certificates (RECs) sold in Green e® Energy certified sales, in order to promote high 
quality renewable electricity development . and generation, and the environmental 
benefits of such generation in place of traditional fuels used for electricity. 
- The following criteria apply to all Green e® Energy certified products (Renewable 
Energy Certificates, utility green pricing programs, and competitive market 
electricity products). Additional details about the Green e® Energy certification 
criteria, the application process, verification summary , marketing compliance review, 
etc. can be found in the Green e® Energy Code of Conduct , available on our website , 
www.green e.org/energy , along with a glossary that includes many of the terms that 
appear in the Standard . 
- II. ELIGIBLE SOURCES OF SUPPLY 
- A. Definition of Eligible Renewables 
- The following types of renewable energy are eligible to supply Green e® Energy 
certified products. Renewable electricity generation facilities supplying renewable 
energy used in Green e® Energy certified products must meet all applicable 
eligibility rules in the Standard at the time of generation of each MWh, unless the 
facilities have received an exemption or grandfathering under a previous version of 
this Standard . 
- All biomethane production from a facility on a common carrier pipeline that is used 
to supply Green e® Energy certified products or used to supply generators that 
supply Green e® Energy certified products must be Green e® Renewable Fuels 
certif ied excep t waste from a concentrated animal feeding operation (“CAFO”) . 
Related pro ducts will currently remain eligible only under this Standard. The 
treatment of CAFOs in the Green e® Renewable Fuels Standard is under review . See 
section s I.A.3 and III.C.6 of the Renewable Fuels Standard for more details. 
- 1. Solar Electric 
2. Wind 
3. Geothermal 
4. Hydropower from new generation capacity on a non impoundment or new 
generation capacity on an existing impoundment that meets one or more of the 
following conditions: 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 4 a. the hydropower facility is certified by the Low Impact Hydropower Institute 
(LIHI) ; 
b. for Canadian hydropower facilities only, the facility is EcoLogo certified; or 
c. the hydropower facility consists of a turbine in a pipeline or a turbine in an 
irrigation canal. 
- For facilities falling under a) or b) above, only output generated during the period of 
LIHI certification or EcoLogo certification is eligible for Green e® Energy certified sale. 
- Renewables from new impoundments of water are not eligible. 
- Electrical energy increases due to improvements made on or after the applicable 
New Date (see Section II.E) may be eligible if: 
- they are not due to routine maintenance (i.e. output would be increased 
compared to original design); and 
- they do not increase water storage capacity or the head of an existing water 
reservoir ; and 
- independent third party reporting demonstrates that increased annual 
generation of electrical energy will result from these improvements. 
- Also note that only the increased annual generation of electrical energy due to 
improvements is eligible for use in Green e® Energy certified products. Eligible 
improvements may include, but are not limited to, the following measures: 
- Rewinding or replacing the existing generator 
- Replacing turbines or significantly modifying turbine runners 
- Addition of a minimum flow unit at an existing facility 
- Computerizing control 
- In order for increases in annual generation volume to be eligible for Green e® Energy 
certification, the owner of the facility that has undergone eligible improvements 
must complete and submit a copy of the Green e® Energy Increased Electrical 
Output Worksheet (please contact Green e® Energy staff to receive a copy of this 
worksheet) for Green e® Energy staff review and approval. 
- 5. Solid, liquid, and gaseous forms of Biomass from the following fuels :1,2,3,4, 
a. Woody waste, including but not limited to residues such as tops and limbs 
- 1 Includes “black liquor” from pulp and paper processing, mill residues, industrial waste wood, and waste wood from 
woodworking or wood processing, so long as the wood is not chemically treated or coated. 
2 At a future time when the EPA, or other similarly reputable authority, releases findings on biogenic carbon dioxide 
emissions, and the carbon intensity of certain types of biomass may be determined with reasonable accuracy, then 
Green e Energy may reevalu ate the eligibility of biomass resources used to generate renewable electricity. 
Emerging technologies generating electricity from byproducts and waste streams may be eligible for Green e 
Energy, however such technologies should be able to demonstrate that procurement and use of their fuel has a 
favorable carbon balance. 
3 Including liquid biofuels made entirely of eligible resource noted in Section 2.A.5. Food crops or animal feed are 
explicitly excluded 
4 Biogas from a shared pipeline is eligible only if it can be demonstrated that all environmental attributes are 
appropriately transferred along the chain of custody. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 5 and urban wood waste, is eligible if the following requirements are met :5 
i. The fuel does not contain paints, plastics, Formica, halogens, chlorine, or 
halide compounds like chromated copper arsenate treated materials, 
arsenic, or contaminating treatments. Qualified wood fuels may contain de 
minimis quantities6 of wood containing the above excluded contaminates. 
Railroad ties and utility poles are excluded from eligibility; 
ii. Forestry derived fuels originate from forests that were managed in 
accordance with State or Provincial best management practices and 
regulations; 
iii. Forestry derived fuels were removed in accordance with State or Provincial 
best management practices and regulations; and 
iv. The fuel is not derived from whole trees unless at least one of the following 
is met: 
- The whole trees are urban wood waste , including used Christmas 
trees; 
- The whole trees are cut as maintenance of existing roads. Such 
roads are not on protected lands or wilderness . Woody fuel from 
road building activity is not eligible; 
- The whole trees are on private or state land already downed 
naturally or killed naturally by wind, storms, fire, pests, or pathogens; 
or 
- An independent third party, qualified in sustainable forestry 
management and chain of custody issues, certifies that that the 
whole trees are part of a thinning that meets a. or b. below:7 
a. If on a plantation ,8 the plantation was not established on land 
converted from any other forest after 20129, and the thinning 
improves the ecology, biodiversity, and ecosystem function of the 
forest and surrounding area. 
b. If not on a plantation, the thinning is part of a plan to improve the 
ecology in terms of natural forest structure, protection of 
biodiversity, and ecosystem function of the forest and surrounding 
area. 
b. Agricultural crop residue that is unmerchantable as food (or as animal feed) . 
For example, crops intended for human or animal consumption but damaged 
by drought or storms would qualify, as would crops with a non energy 
- 5 CRS reserves the right to require additional documentation to verify eligibility of any resource. In some instances, 
third party certification may be used to demonstrate eligibility. 
6 De minimis quantities is defined as: less than 1% of the total annual BTU value is derived from treated wood 
7 Thinnings or harvests of whole trees from Federal lands are not eligible at this time because of the difficulty of 
ensuring that the thinning was done as part of a plan for sustainability. However, the Green e Governance Board 
may reevaluate this at a lat er time if an appropriately rigorous and enforceable third party chain of custody 
certification is developed to address Federal lands. 
8 Plantation is defined as: A stand maintained by planting or artificial seeding, grown for the purpose of harvest. 
9 If land was a plantation prior to 2012 but is no longer being managed as a plantation (e.g. the majority of existing 
trees have been regenerated naturally), it does not qualify under this provision and must be evaluated under 4.b. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 6 primary purpose, such as waste from animal feed production . For the 
purposes of this Standard, a tree is not an agricultural crop. 
c. Other solid, liquid, or gaseous organic waste including biogas created from 
food waste (e.g. municipal compost ing facilities) and food and beverage 
processing waste . 10,11 
d. Energy crops , excluding food crops or animal feed, that have a rotation less 
than 10 years (e.g. poplar, willow, or eucalyptus), and meet at least one of the 
below criteria to avoid land conversion from forest land or displace food 
production: 
i. Grown on agricultural land not in use for food production in the last two 
years; or 
ii. Grown on agricultural land in a way that does not displace food 
production. 
- e. Landfill gas and wastewater methane .12 
f. Green e® Energy will consider allowing waste toenergy (WTE) technologies 
using biogenic resources and will review these technologies as they mature 
and as practical application reaches near term in North America. Municipal 
solid waste is specifically excluded from eligibility and from WTE technologies 
that will be considered. 
- 6. Biodiesel (B100) that is used to generate electricity is eligible for Green e® 
Energy. Biodiesel blended with petroleum diesel is permitted if all of the 
following conditions are met: 
- a. The biodiesel is separately measured (and verified) from the petroleum diesel ; 
b. Contracts are in place to allow CRS to verify that the biodiesel was converted 
to electricity; 
c. Only the amount of electricity generated from the biodiesel may be counted 
as part of a Green e® Energy certified product; and 
d. Feedstock used to make biodiesel must either be a waste, that is no longer 
suitable or merchantable for its primary purpose, such as waste vegetable oil, 
or some other feedstock whose energy and carbon balance is demonstrably 
favorable. 
- 10 Organic waste can include waste and residues of biological origin from agriculture (including vegetal and animal 
substances), and forestry and related industries where not otherwise expressly prohibited in this Standard. 
11 In the case that a biogenic methane capture and destruction project (such as a dairy burning biogas produced by 
an animal waste digester) is receiving carbon offsets for the destruction of methane, renewable electricity and RECs 
generated using the heat o f combustion of such methane are eligible under this Standard so long as the calculation 
of carbon offsets does not include the environmental benefits arising from generation of renewable electricity or of 
backing down generation elsewhere on the grid. Gre ene Energy staff reserve the right to request offset calculation 
methodologies of such projects. 
12 Biomethane that is used to generate electricity is eligible for Green e Energy provided that the facility generating 
the electricity complies with all applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances and meets all of the air pollution, 
groundwater, and efflue nt requirements of the state in which the project is sited. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 7 7. Fuel cells are eligible only if powered by hydrogen derived from any of the 
above eligible renewable resources (See section II.E.7) . 
8. Ocean based energy resources captured through tidal and wave 
technologies, if located in a state with permitting processes specific to the 
resource type at the time of construction and if the generator is fully 
licensed at the state and federal level (as a pplicable), or if the generator is 
reviewed and approved by the Green e® Governance Board prior to the 
generator ’s output being used in a Green e® Energy certified product.13 
- B. Co firing of Biomass with Non Renewables 
- Cofiring of eligible forms of biomass with non renewables is permitted if at least 
one of the following conditions is met: 
- 1. The facility is located in an electric system control area that makes use of a 
generation tracking system (e.g. PJM GATS, WREGIS) that is fully capable of 
accurately measuring and reporting the differentiated (biomass fired and non 
biomass fired) electrical output from the facility; or 
2. The biomass is in a gaseous or liquid state, is separately metered , and there are 
contracts in place to verify that the biomass portion was converted to electricity; 
or 
3. Facilities that do not meet either of the criteria above may be eligible subject to a 
case bycase review by the Green e® Governance Board . The methodology 
presented to Green e® Energy must demonstrate that the heat input (BTU value) 
used to generate electrical output from the facility is attributed to the eligible 
biomass fuel. Some of the criteria that the Board will consider in making a 
decision are: 
a. Whether the facility was modified to accept biomass fuel; 
b. Whether there is an independent entity involved in verifying or determining 
the appropriate measurement; and 
c. Whether there is a way to determine and ensure the net electricity increment 
being sold as “renewable ” can be attributed to eligible biomass fuel. 
Only the amount of electricity generated from the eligible biomass may count 
towards the Green e® Energy criteria. Facilities generating electricity using 5% or less 
of non eligible fuels as a percent of total heat input (on a BTU basis, for example) do 
not need to meet one of the three conditions above, however those MWh generated 
from non eligible fuels are not eligi ble for sale in Green e® Energy certified products 
and must not be included in eligible MWh generated at such a facility. The 
assessment of whether the 5% threshold is exceeded must be made on a periodic 
basis, at least quarterly. Periods for which the 5% threshold is exceeded must either 
- 13 Green e Energy Participants or generators of electricity using tidal and wave based resources should contact 
Green e Energy staff with questions or materials related to eligibility. The Green e Energy program reserves the right 
to reject facilities with serious environmental impacts. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 8 meet one of the three above conditions or be excluded from Green e® Energy 
certified sales. 
- C. Emissions Limits on Biomass 
- This Standard strives to promote biomass resources that, on a total fuel cycle basis, 
do not increase atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations in time frames that are 
meaningful in addressing global climate change. 
- All facilities must be in compliance with all state and/or federal laws/rules regarding 
emissions. For facilities subject to New Source Review (NSR), the facility must be 
compliant with all applicable regional and state standards pertaining to NSR. 
- D. Emissions Criteria for the Non Renewable Portion of a Green e® Energy 
Product 
- Some renewable electricity products do not meet 100% of a customer ’s electricity 
load and/or will contain non renewable energy. The emission rates per kWh for SO 2, 
NO x, and CO 2 from the non renewable portion of the eligible product may not 
exceed customer ’s average utility, state or regional power emissions rates. Rates are 
calculated from the latest available EPA EGRID data, unless the regional system 
administrator, PUC or other authority makes more up todate information available. 
The product may not inc lude any specific purchases of nuclear power in the non 
renewable portion of the product other than what is contained in any system power 
purchase (i.e. the product may not include differentiated nuclear power). A utility ’s or 
power pool ’s system mix may be used to satisfy the non renewable portion of a 
Green e® Energy certified product. 
- E. New Renewables 
- Only new renewables are eligible to meet Green e® Energy standards. The term 
“New Date ” is defined to include any eligible renewable facility beginning operation 
or repowered after the dates indicated on the following table: 
- Year of Sale New Date 
2021 2007 
2022 2008 
2023 2009 
2024 2010 
2025 2011 
2026 2012 
- The New Date will continue to advance by one year each year after 2026. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 9 In order for the output of a renewable generation facility to be eligible for use in a 
Green e® Energy certified sale, the facility must meet at least one of the following 
conditions: 
- 1. Placed in operation (generating electricity , including test energy put onto the 
electricity grid ) on or after the applicable New Date; 
2. Repowered on or after the applicable New Date such that at 80% of the fair 
market value of the project derives from new generation equipment installed as 
part of the repowering14. In order to be recognized as repowered for the purposes 
of Green e® Energy, the owner of the facility seeking “repowered ” status must 
complete and submit a copy of the Green e® Energy Repowering Worksheet 
(please contact Green e® Energy staff to receive a copy of this worksheet) for 
Green e® Energy staff review and approval ; 
3. A separable improvement to or enhancement of an existing operating facility 
that was first placed in operation prior to the applicable New Date, such that the 
proposed incremental generation is contractually available for sale and metered 
separate from the existing generation at the facility; 
4. A biomass co firing facility that meets all requirements for biomass co firing 
outlined in section II.B. above and began co firing non eligible fuels with eligible 
biomass as defined in II.A. above on or after the applicable New Date; 
5. A 100 percent switch from a non eligible fuel to an eligible fuel on or after the 
applicable New Date; 
6. A separately metered landfill gas resource that was not being used to generate 
electricity prior to the applicable New Date; 
7. A fuel cell that began generating electricity on or after the applicable New Date. 
The hydrogen powering the fuel cell must be derived from a facility that meets 
the resource eligibility requirements described in section II.A. above. 
8. The facility is supplying renewable electricity or RECs to a Green e® Energy 
Participant under an eligible contract that meets all requirements of “Long Term 
Contracts for Supply ” as described in II.H, below ; only the specific output 
approved by Green e® Energy under such a contract may be used beyond the 
New Date facility age limit above. 
- Any enhancement of fuel source that increases generation at a facility built prior to 
New Date , without the construction of a new or repowered, separately metered 
generating unit, is not eligible to participate, with the exception of new landfill gas 
resources identified in (6) above. An eligible “new renewable ” must qualify as an 
“eligible renewable resource ” as described herein. 
- 14 Hydroelectric facilities are not eligible to apply for repowering using this document. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 10 F. Energy Storage 
- Energy storage systems or plants, including pumped hydroelectric storage, battery 
storage, compressed air energy storage, superconducting magnetic energy storage, 
flywheels, and super capacitors, are not energy resources. While each of these 
storage technologies play an important role in managing the delivery of non 
dispatchable renewable energy, they are not in themselves a renewable energy 
resource. Therefore, these storage technologies themselves are not qualifying 
sources of renewable generation. 
- G. Parasitic Load 
- Renewable energy consumed as parasitic load of an eligible facility is not eligible for 
use in a Green e® Energy certified product. Parasitic load is a load that contributes to 
the process of electricity generation. 
- H. Long Term Contracts for Supply and Sale 
- Green e® Energy certifies certain sales of renewable electricity and RECs from 
renewable electricity generation units for more than the 15 year “New Date ” window 
described in Section II.E, above, and up to 30 years. In this section, “longterm ” 
contracts are those extending beyond this “New Date ” window. All criteria below 
must be met.15 Each approved long term contract, and corresponding non 
residential end use purchaser (s), is a unique Green e® Energy certified product 
requiring a contract with CRS, fee assessment and annual verification. 
- Certain utility products may qualify for certain exceptions for extended contract life if 
they meet the criteria in Section V.E of this Standard. 
- 1. The REC or renewable electricity is purchased by the Green e® Energy Program 
Participant directly from the owner o r authorized representative of a generat ion 
unit, or is generated by a generation unit owned by the Participant. 
- Contracts between Participant and generation unit(s) will no longer be eligible if 
they are sold or transferred, except in the case that: the generation unit 
ownership changes or the non residential end use purchaser is acquired by 
another company; both the generation unit(s) and the non residential end use 
purchaser (s) remain the same; and all required terms and conditions are 
maintained; 
- 2. Only the specific number of RECs or percentage of generation output under the 
approved long term contract with the Participant is eligible for long term use, 
through the life of the contract or 30 years, whichever is shorter, so long as the 
Participant maintains certification of the product through this period. 
- 15 Other exceptions for long term supply exist for single mix products under Section IV.C. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 11 
Only the output provided to the Participant under an approved long term 
contract will remain eligible under the Standard in effect at the time of contract 
execution for the approved life of the contract, except in the event of policy or 
market changes in renewable energy markets that are not consistent with the 
intent of the Standard as interpreted by the Green e® Governance Board, 
including changes that would violate Green e® Energy ’s policies on double 
counting; 
- 3. No later than 12 months from the date of Green e® Energy eligibility per Section 
II.E.1 7, the Participant must: 
- a. Execute a contract for supply with the owner or authorized representative of 
the generation unit(s); and 
b. Execute contracts with all non residential end use purchasers on the Long 
term Purchasers List. New purchasers may not be added once the Long term 
Purchasers List is approved by Green e® Energy staff. If a purchaser is 
removed from the Long term Purchasers List for any reason, then the output 
they would have received is no longer eligible under this Long Term Contracts 
for Supply and Sale section .16 
- 4. Identify and report to Green e® Energy a list of non residential end use 
purchasers of the contracted supply in a Green e® Energy certified transaction 
(“Long term Purchasers List”), who will be the only entities eligible to purchase 
the output of the generation unit from the Green e® Energy Participant in 
accordance with the deadline posted on the Green e® Website . 
- I. Extended Use Criteria for On Site and Direct Line Generation 
- Under the following scenarios, the facility may remain eligible beyond the new date 
window: 
- a. The facility and user are on one site together; or 
b. The facility and user are connected with a direct line connection, 
and in both cases, the facility’s RECs are retired by or on behalf of the user. 
- Only facilities brought online or repowered on or after January 1, 2003 are eligible for 
this type of extended use. The maximum length of time any facility may be eligible 
for this type of extended use is 30 years. 
- 16 Regulated Utility products are exempted from H.3.b. as well as H.4 . See section V.E. for utility specific criteria. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 12 III. PRODUCT SPECIFICATIONS 
- A. Minimum Purchase Quantity 
- Green e® Energy certified products sold to residential customers must contain at 
least the minimum amounts of Green e® Energy eligible renewable energy 
described below. 
- 1. Percentage ofUse Products : Retail electricity offerings must match at least 25% 
of a residential customer ’s electricity usage with new renewables above and 
beyond any state mandated Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) renewable 
amount. If a marketer or utility offers the option to match less than 50% of a 
residential customer ’s electricity use, they must also offer a 100% option to 
residential customers. 
2. Block Products : Electricity and REC products sold as block products must be 
100% Green e® Energy eligible renewables in a minimum size of 100 
kWh/month.17 
3. Capacity Based Products : Electricity or REC products sold as kW of capacity or 
shares of a facility must deliver a minimum of 100 kWh a month averaged over a 
calendar year, or they may instead deliver a minimum of 10% of the customer’s 
monthly electricity use averaged over a calendar year. 
- Green e® Energy certified products sold to non residential customers have no 
minimum purchase quantity requirement. However, commercial purchasers 
interested in using the Green e® logo to promote their purchase must meet the 
requirements of the Green e® Marketplace Program: http://www.green 
e.org/marketplace . 
- B. Vintage of Eligible Renewables 
- A Green e® Energy certified product may include only renewables that are 
generated in the calendar year in which the product is sold, the first three months of 
the following calendar year, or the last six months of the prior calendar year. 
- C. Fully Aggregated Renewables 
- Green e® Energy only certifies renewable energy products that are fully aggregated 
to the extent possible under law. 
- Green e® Energy certified MWh (electricity or REC) must contain all the greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emission s reduction benefits, including carbon dioxide (CO 2) reduction 
benefits, associated with the MWh of renewable electricity when it was generated. 
- 17 When RECs are sold on a one time basis to a residential customer, the minimum purchase quantity shall be 100 
kWh. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 13 Emissions of other capped pollutants where allowances are not routinely assigned to 
renewable electricity generators18 are not required to be included in Green e® Energy 
certified renewable electricity or RECs.19 
- D. Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) Renewables, Other Mandated 
Renewables, and Financial Incentives 
- Green e® Energy certified products must be comprised of eligible renewable 
generation over and above anything required by state or federal RPS requirements, 
legislation, or settlement agreements (regulatory surplus) . Green e® Energy does not 
certify renewable electricity or REC sales that result in double counting, including 
double counting between compliance and voluntary markets. If a utility or electricity 
marketer is subject to an RPS or other mandate or agreement, they must comply 
with it regardless of the existence of a volun tary market for renewable energy. If a 
Participant in Green e® Energy is determined to be out of compliance with these 
obligations, or is selling renewables from a mandated facility, that may be grounds 
for decertification from Green e® Energy. 
- Renewable energy or RECs may not be used in a Green e® Energy certified product 
under the following circumstances: 
- 1. The REC or the electricity from which the RECs are derived is being used 
simultaneously to meet a local, state, or federal energy mandate or other legal 
requirement; or 
2. The RECs or renewable electricity are derived from a renewable facility that has 
been mandated by a local, state, or federal government agency or was required 
under any legal requirement ; or 
3. Capacity (MW) and/or generation facilities associated with the renewable 
electricity or RECs are used for compliance, even when RECs are not required to 
determine compliance with an RPS or similar policy. 
- There may be other types of implementation processes and compliance 
assessments for RPS and similar policies that would render RECs or renewable 
electricity ineligible for use in Green e® Energy certified sales. 
- When a facility generat es renewable energy in excess of the government mandate 
or other legal contract this may be an exception to (1) (3) above , in which case that 
excess (either renewable electricity or the RECs associated with the renewable 
electricity) may be used in a Green e® Energy certified product. 
- Only for a certified renewable electricity product that meets 100% of a customer ’s 
load or a Green e® Direct certified purchase of renewable electricity , Green e® Energy 
- 18 For example, under the national sulfur dioxide cap, allowances are assigned to entities with compliance 
obligations, i.e. polluting entities. 
19 As of 7/15/2010, such capped pollutants include sulfur dioxide nationally and the oxides of nitrogen regionally. For 
more details on marketing claims under the Green e Energy program please see the Green e Energy Code of 
Conduct. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 14 allows a percentage of the product content to be satisfied with renewables reported 
toward a renewable portfolio standard (RPS) or other similar state policy, up to the 
amount that is attributable to the customer of the voluntary product.20 All such 
resources must also go through the Green e® Energy verification process, and meet 
all other applicable Green e® Energy eligibility and disclosure requirements. 
Distribution of renewables reported toward a n RPS or similar policy must be 
consistent across the load on which the policy ’s obligation calculations are based, 
and allocating all such renewables to one customer type or group of customers is 
not allowed. However, variability of geographic location of generation (not 
renewable resource type) is allowed to the extent required by a Partic ipant's or 
Participant’s supplier’s RPS obligations under the laws of said state (s). 
- RECs or renewable energy from renewable generating facilities that obtain tax or 
financial incentive payments are eligible under Green e® Energy (to the extent 
allowed by law, regulation, and contract language governing the tax or financial 
incentives program) , so long as these incentives do not also require that the RECs or 
renewable electricity be used or counted towards an RPS or other policy, as 
described above . 
- New regulatory programs may be created; the nature of the regulatory program will 
impact resulting Green e® policy. Regulatory programs that render renewable 
energy ineligible to be included in a Green e® Energy certified product will be added 
to Appendix A: State specific requirements and Restrictions. Some regulatory 
programs do not restrict renewable energy eligibility but do require that additional 
disclosures be provided to customers. Please refer to the Green e® Energy Code of 
Conduct for specific dis closure guidance. 
- E. Double Counting and Use of Utility Resources 
- Eligible RECs or renewable energy can be used once and only once; making a claim 
(e.g. stating “we buy wind power ”) is one example of a “use” that results in 
retirement. Renewable energy or RECs (or the renewable or environmental 
attributes incorporated in that REC) that can be legitimately claimed by another 
party may not be used in Green e® Energy certified REC products.21 Examples of 
prohibited double uses include, but are not limited to: 
- 20 As a general principal, Green e Energy Program Participants offering a certified electricity product that 
meets 100% of a voluntary customer’s load with renewable electricity are not required to provide the customer with 
Green e Energy eligible renewables for more than 100% of the customer’s electricity load. 
21 If the owner of a renewable generation facility is reporting direct greenhouse gas emissions in a legally binding 
(through voluntary agreement, law or regulation) cap andtrade program and the renewable energy facility is 
included within the organizational boundary in the reporting structure, the following applies: Renewable energy 
facilities that are owned by entities participating in a legally binding greenhouse gas cap and trade program are 
ineligible under Green e Energy. Green e Energy may grant exceptions on a case bycase basis if the cap andtrade 
program has an accounting mechanism that assures that the GHG emissions benefits of renewable electricity 
and/or RECs are not double counted or double claimed, such as exists in nine out of 10 states participating in the 
Regional Greenho use Gas Initiative (RGGI). Future cap and trade systems will be considered as they are developed. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 15 1. When the same REC is sold by one party to more than one party, or any case 
where another party has a conflicting contract for the RECs or the renewable 
electricity; 
2. When the same REC is claimed by more than one party, including any expressed 
or implied environmental claims made pursuant to electricity coming from a 
renewable energy resource, environmental labeling or disclosure requirements. 
This includes representing the energy from which RECs are derived as renewable 
in calculating another entity ’s product or portfolio resource mix for the purposes 
of marketing or disclosure; 
3. When the same REC is used by an electricity provider or utility to meet an 
environmental mandate, such as an RPS, and is also used to satisfy customer 
sales under Green e® Energy; or 
4. Use of one or more attributes of the renewable energy or REC by another party 
(See Section III.C. “Fully Aggregated Renewables ” for details). This includes when 
a REC is simultaneously sold to represent “renewable electricity ” to one party, and 
one or more Attributes associated with the same MWh of generation (such as 
CO 2 reduction) are also sold, to another party. 
- When a utility is involved in a REC transaction, either as a generator, a purchaser of 
RECs, or a purchaser of the commodity electricity from which the RECs have been 
derived, the local utility commissions in the states where the electricity was 
generated and where the electricity is sold must be notified of the transactions and, 
in some cases, of the money received by the utility. 
- F. Customer Sited Facilities 
- Ongrid customer sited (behind the meter) facilities that meet the eligible 
renewables definition are eligible sources for Green e® Energy. Customer sited off 
grid renewables are eligible only for certified use by the customer owner and only if 
all attributes/RECs are retained and claimed by that customer . Any generation unit 
less than or equal to 10 kW may use a conservative engineering estimate of output. 
CRS must pre approve the estimation methodology. Systems over 10 kW must be 
metered. 
- Customer sited generators (such as net metered solar) cannot claim to be 
selling/supplying renewable electricity if they sell the RECs (in part or in whole) 
separately. 
- G. Location of Eligible Generation Facilities 
- Renewable electricity generation facilities supplying renewable MWh to Green e® 
Energy certified renewable energy products may only be located in: the 50 US states; 
the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American 
Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, and 
associated territorial waters and airspace; Canada; or portions of North American 
Electricity Reliability Corporation regions located in Mexico. Eligibility of other 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 16 locations outside of these areas will be considered and decided upon by the Green 
e® Governance Board on a case bycase basis. Additional geographic restrictions 
apply to utility green pricing and competitive electricity products; see section IV.A 
and IV.B. 
- H. Tracking System Use 
- In all but a few specific cases listed in this section, Green e® Energy certified 
products must be supplied and substantiated by renewable MWh tracked in a 
renewable energy tracking system that is approved by Green e® Energy. Green e® 
Energy provides a list of approved tracking systems and the criteria under which 
they are evaluated at www.green e.org . 
- Only in the following cases is the use of tracking systems not required for Green e® 
Energy certified products and participants: 
- 1. The entire facility has an aggregated nameplate capacity less than or equal to 2 
MW, or 
2. The facility is located on property owned by the retail electricity user claiming the 
RECs/renewable energy or has a “direct line connection,” that user is claiming all 
RECs generated by the facility during the period of certification, and that all 
generation is validated by attestations and 3rd party verification records, or 
3. The Participant’s total certified sales volume is less than or equal to 10,000 MWh 
for that reporting year. In this case, another tracking system accountholder must 
retire supply on behalf of the Participant’s certified sales (in addition to all other 
required verification procedures), or 
4. The facility (or Participants) using output from the facility in Green e® Energy 
certified transactions provides to Green e® Energy an independent 3rd party 
verification of the facility, including, but not limited to, its total output and sales 
agreements, to verify no double selling has occurred, in accordance with Green 
e® Energy verification procedures. 
In addition, in certain circumstances, Green e® Energy may allow RECs to be retired 
for a certified retail product in the tracking system account of a different Green e® 
Energy participant, rather than the account of the participant offering the retail 
product. Participants must receive approval in advance from a Green e® Energy 
representative as described in the Green e® Energy verification instructions. 
- For all eligible supply, each Green e® Energy participant, if not exempted by an 
exception above, must use an account in an approved tracking system to 
substantiate the participant’s certified sales in a given calendar year following 
procedures in the Green e® verification protocols. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 17 IV. ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR ELECTRICITY PRODUCTS 
- A. Geographic Eligibility for Electricity Products 
- For electricity products (i.e. products used to meet a customer’s electricity needs), 
provider can source from one of the following geographic boundaries: 
- 1. The single state where all of the product’s customers are located; and/or an 
adjacent state where the electricity, bundled with a REC, is wheeled into the 
respective state of the customer being served ; or 
2. One or more of the following: The North American Electric Reliability Corporation 
(NERC) region, Independent System Operator (ISO), Regional Transmission 
Organization (RTO) or Balancing Authority Area of the customer being served; 
customer’s regulated electric service territory; and/or an adjacent NERC, ISO, RTO 
or Balancing Authority Area where the electricity, bundled with a REC, is wheeled 
into the respective region of the customer being served. 
- B. Use of Renewable Energy Certificates in an Electricity Product 
- Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) can be combined with nonrenewable power 
to serve green electricity customers under the following conditions: 
- 1. The Renewable Energy Certificates must come from the defined geographic 
boundary of the customer being served as noted above if they are to be 
marketed as an “electricity ” product; 
2. The emission rates per kWh for SO 2, NO x, and CO 2 for the underlying electricity 
must be at or below the customer ’s average utility, state or regional power 
emissions rates ;22 and 
3. The underlying electricity cannot include any specific purchases of nuclear power 
in the non renewable portion of the product other than what is contained in any 
system power purchase (e.g. the product may not include differentiated nuclear 
power). 
- If the RECs are sourced from outside the defined geographic boundary defined in 
Section IV.A. (Geographic Eligibility for Electricity Products), the product will need to 
be marketed as a REC product and contain the appropriate disclosure language (see 
Green e® Energy Code of Conduct). 
- 22 This only applies to specific purchases of electricity from a specific generation source(s) rather than purchases of 
system mix or local power pool electricity. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 18 C. Products Contracting Supply from Portions of Specific Facilities to Individual 
Customers23 
- Some participants offer products where customers (residential and non residential) 
can enroll to purchase renewable electricity from a portion of a specific generating 
unit. In these cases, the Participant selling a Green e® Energy certified product 
might have multiple generating units for which different customers have enrolled to 
purchase portions of output. For instance, half of the customers are enrolled to 
purchase portions of the output from Solar Farm A and the other h alf are enrolled to 
purchase por tions of the output from Solar Farm B. In these cases, Green e® Energy 
waives the requirement to provide all customers of Single Mix products renewable 
energy from the same facilities. In such cases, the Participant may alter the specific 
facility providing electricity to the customers, but not the resource type. A pr ogram 
of this type is a unique certified product requiring a contract with CRS, fee 
assessment and annual verification. 
- 1. In order to qualify for Green e® Energy certification under this program model, all 
of the below criteria must be met: 
a. The product must be structured such that each customer signs up to 
purchase renewable energy entirely from one specific generating unit; 
b. Any one customer cannot enroll for 100% of a facility’s output; 
c. The product purchased by each customer must contain the same resource 
type. Each customer’s purchase may vary as to the source facility within a 
resource type, but all customers must receive the same overall resource type. 
- 2. In certain cases, Green e® Energy will consider certifying the sale of renewable 
electricity from facilities used in these products for more than the 15 year “New 
Date” window described in Section II.E, above, and up to 30 years. In order to be 
considered for such an exception, a Green e® Energy participant must submit a 
formal Community Renewables program exception request to the Green e® 
Governance Board. 
- V. ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR REGULATED UTILITY PRODUCTS 
- A. Product Pricing 
- In no case should the above market costs of the energy used directly for a certified 
utility product be allocated to customers who are non participants in the program. If 
such costs are related to public policy initiatives deemed acceptable by their 
regulators, a utility may appeal to the Green e® Governance Board for approval. 
- 23 This section IV.C does not apply to regulated utility products that meet the criteria in section V.E. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 19 B. Marketing and Performance Targets 
- If local stakeholders believe a certified product is not receiving sufficient marketing 
support, the stakeholders can petition CRS to require that the utility offering the 
program provide additional information, such as overall marketing expenditures for 
the certified product . All information provided by participating utilities to fulfill this 
criterion will be treated as confidential by the Center for Resource Solutions. The 
Board reserves the right to make case bycase determinations on the adequacy of 
individual marketing efforts made by participating util ities. 
- C. Waitlists for Green Pricing Products 
- In the event that a utility Green Pricing product becomes fully subscribed, 
consumers may have to be placed on a waiting list before they can officially 
subscribe to such a program. If program providers have a waiting list, the waiting 
period must not last more than one year from when the customer seeks to join the 
program. Should the program provider accru e a waiting list of interested 
Participants, the provider shall send a stand alone letter to the waiting list on a semi 
annual basis explaining why the list is not being served and what steps the provider 
plans to take to rectify the supply/demand imbalance. In the event that the program 
provider holds a waiting list, it shall notify CRS immediately stating the reasons for 
the insufficient supply and actions planned to remedy the situation. In the event of a 
semi annual wait list notification, the provider shall notify CRS of the event and 
provide the number of customers on the waiting list. Enrolling but not serving 
customers for more than one year may be grounds for removing certification. 
- D. Regulatory Approval 
- Certification is only available to products that have been approved by the 
appropriate regulatory or oversight body with jurisdiction over the product prior to 
the products’ nomination for certification. 
- E. Tariffs with Long Term Contract Options 
- Utility products can be approved by CRS staff under the eligibility criteria in Section 
II.H of this Standard for up to the longest customer commitment contract term if the 
product meets the following criteria: 
- 1. The product contains varying customer commitment lengths but has a 
commitment length option up to the maximum approved long term contract 
option per Section II.H. 
2. For products offered to non residential customers, at least 25% of generation 
must be committed to customers that sign up for the longest option term in 
their procurement agreement; and those customers are disclosed to Center for 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 20 Resource Solutions within 1 year of the product’s certification, unless otherwise 
approved by CRS. 
3. The product must be structured such that every customer enrolled receives 
renewable electricity from pre specified eligible facilities . 
4. The product consists of generators dedicated to the product, and resources may 
be added to the product after initial approval but dedicated resources shall not 
be removed for the duration of the longest option term. When dedicated 
generators do not cover the total demand of the product, additional supply from 
alternative qualifying generators may also be dedicated to the product (bridge or 
supplemental RECs) if pre approved by CRS staff on a n annual basis. 
5. After the start date of the product, generators supplying the product that are 
under long term supply contracts may be added to the list of generators that are 
dedicated to the product for the longest customer length available at the time 
the generator is added to the product. 
6. The product contains non residential customer commitment lengths no shorter 
than 5 years.24 
- F. Utility Product s Serving Multiple Utilities (Hub and Spoke) 
- Some utilities are offering products to customers in conjunction with other local 
utilities. In one such model, there is a central body (hub) that develops a renewable 
energy product that is marketed by more than one utility (spokes). For example, the 
output of a wind turbine, a landfill gas facility, and a solar array could be bundled 
into one product and sold by all of the members of a transmission and distribution 
cooperative. Since there is a single product and a single point of contact (the hub), 
Green e® Energy is willing to treat this as one certification regardless of the number 
of vendors selling the product so long as they meet all of t he conditions below. 
- 1. In order to qualify for Green e® Energy certification using the hub and spoke 
model, the product must: 
a. Contain the same proportional mix of resources for each participating spoke . 
Each participating spoke may vary the generation location within a resource 
type but all participating spokes must offer the same overall mix of resource 
types. 
b. Be sold within the same regional area. To receive hub andspoke treatment 
from Green e® Energy the product resources must be sited in the same area 
of the country as the customer. The resources do not have to be located all in 
the same state, but must be in the same region (see section above; 
Geographic Boundaries for Sourcing Eligible Electricity) as the customers. 
c. Utilize the same marketing materials for each participating vendor. All 
- 24 Residential customers are not bound to a commitment length for products that serve both residential and non 
residential customers . 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 21 participating vendors must use the same marketing materials. Individual 
utility vendors may brand the marketing materials. However, marketing 
materials must be consistent across the product service territory so Green e® 
Energy can do a single marketing compliance review. Limited exceptions to 
this rule will be tolerated so long as Green e® Energy is notified. 
d. Undergo a single verification process audit. Green e® Energy program staff 
must have a single auditor as point of contact. The auditor must have access 
to customer records of all participating vendors. 
2. Obligations of the Hub and Spoke Facilitator (the Hub): 
a. Offer the same product to all participating retail distribution utilities (the 
Spokes). 
b. Provide a single point of contact for Green e® Energy. 
c. Undergo a single annual verification process audit. 
d. Undergo single marketing compliance reviews. 
e. Ensure that all requirements of Green e® Energy certification are met. 
f. Keep Green e® Energy informed at all times regarding which distributors are 
marketing the product. 
3. Obligations of the Hub and Spoke Distributors (the Spokes): 
a. Offer the auditor access to billing records. 
b. Abide by the Green e® Energy Code of Conduct. 
- VI. REVISIONS TO THIS STANDARD 
- This Standard is considered a dynamic document and may change over time to 
accommodate changes in the renewable energy marketplace, policy changes that 
affect renewable energy, and/or innovations in renewable energy technology. This 
standard is revised every five years or more frequently as needed. All revisions and 
calls for comments will be posted on the Green e® website ( www.green e.org ). For 
any substantial changes to th is Standard , the Green e® Energy Program commits 
that: 
- 1. Stakeholders will be solicited in advance of Green e® Governance Board meetings 
for input on substantive policy change issues; and 
2. At least one year of notice (following the date of announcement of Board 
approval) will be granted to Green e® Energy program participants and other 
stakeholders before the substantive changes go into effect, unless a more timely 
change is necessary to respond to a significant and imminent problem 
threatening the integrity of green power markets. 
- Marketers of Green e® Energy certified products may petition Green e® Energy for an 
exemption from specific changes in the criteria if they can document current 
contracts or other conditions that prevent them from meeting the change. Products 
that are granted criteria exemptions may be noted on the Green e® web site, and 
the exemption must be noted to customers in the Terms and Conditions in a clear 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 22 manner (e.g. “25% of the renewable energy content of this product is supplied by 
facilities put online prior to 2007 ”). 
- Changes that are not limiting to marketers of Green e® Energy certified products (i.e. 
will impose no burden on currently certified products) or need to be implemented in 
the short term to accommodate external policy changes may take effect 
immediately upon Board approval. 
- Any Green e® Energy P articipant that includes renewable electricity or RECs from a 
facility with which i t has a contract approved by Green e® Energy for continued use 
must disclose such use on the Price, Terms , and Conditions and Product Content 
Label disclosure provided to customers considering the purchase of a Green e® 
Energy certified product containing such output. Renewable energy from such 
facilities may be traded to other Green e® Energy P articipants for use in their own 
Green e® Energy certified sales so long as the original contract or facility ownership 
that was granted continued use remains intact through the original period for which 
it was granted an extension. 
- Companies with contracts or facilities that have been granted continued use may 
transfer such contracts or ownership of such faci lities to other Green e® Energy 
Participants and the original exemption will remain intact for the original period. If a 
company loses Green e® Energy certification of all products for any reason, the 
exemptions granted to facilities based on that company ’s contracts or ownership 
will be withdrawn as of the date that Green e® Energy certification is terminated. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 23 APPENDIX A: STATE SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS AND 
RESTRICTIONS 
- A.1 Texas 
Market Advisory and Green e® Energy Policy Update; March 24, 2008 ; Updated 
September,2024 
- On January 1, 2008, the Public Utility Commission of Texas (“ Texas PUC ”) 
implemented docket 33492 of Substantive Rule number 25.173. Under this docket, 
non wind renewable electricity facilities first operational on or after September 1, 
2005, are granted both a REC and a “Compliance Premium” (CP) for each MWh 
generated. CPs ca n be bought by a Load Serving Entity to satisfy its RPS obligations, 
leaving the REC to be bo ught by another party, who may be buying the REC to 
make a voluntary claim outside of any RPS obligation. However, since both the LSE 
and the buyer of the REC are claiming the benefits of the renewable MWh, a double 
claim occurs. 
- The applicable section of the docket reads: 
- “(l) Target for renewable technologies other than wind power. In order to meet 
the target of at least 500 MW of the total installed renewable capacity after 
September 1, 2005, coming from a renewable energy technology other than a 
source using wind energy as set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section, the 
program administrator shall award compliance premiums to certified REC 
generators other than those powered by wind that were installed and certified by 
the commission pursuant to subsection (n) of this section after September 1, 
2005. A compliance premium is created in conjunction with a REC. 
(1) For eligible non wind renewable technologies, one compliance premium 
shall be awarded for each REC awarded for energy generated after 
December 31, 2007. 
(2) Except as provided in this subsection, the award, retirement, trade, and 
registration of compliance premiums shall follow the requirements of 
subsections (d), (k) and (m) of this section. 
(3) A compliance premium may be used by any entity toward its RPS 
requirement pursuant to subsection (h) of this section. 
(4) The program administrator shall increase the statewide RPS requirement 
calculated for each compliance period pursuant to subsection (h)(1) of this 
section by the number of compliance premiums retired during the 
previous compliance period.” 
- This docket is available from the Texas PUC web site, at: 
https://www.puc.texas.gov/agency/rulesnlaws/subrules/electric/25.173/25.173.pdf 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 24 On November 30th, 2023, the Texas ’ PUC adopted a new 16 TAC §25.173, relating to 
Goal for Renewable Energy. This new rule implements Section 53 of House Bill (HB) 
1500 enacted by the 88th Texas Legislature (R.S.) and established that for generation 
between January 1, 2024 and December 31, 2024, compliance premiums will only be 
issued for solar generation, and compliance premiums will no longer be issued to 
any generation starting January 1, 2025. 
Texas House Bill (HB) 1500 is available at: 
https://legiscan.com/TX/text/HB1500/id/2820169 
- Resulting Green e® Energy Policy 
This policy is effective until further notice. 
- In order to prevent double counting of renewable generation sold in Green e® 
Energy certified products, Green e® Energy requires that for RECs generated during 
a period that CPs were issued for the corresponding generation, those RECs and an 
equal amount of CPs from the same facility are both retired. Any party, not just an 
LSE, may buy and retire a CP. 
- This policy applies to: 
- Generating facilities in Texas that use a renewable resource (as defined in this 
document) other than wind energy .25 
o For solar facilities, generation takes place prior to January 1,2025, or 
o For non solar, non wind facilities, generation takes place prior to 
January 1, 2024 
- This requirement allows the buyer of both the REC and the CP to make a full 
renewable energy claim about the particular MWh of generation. The REC and the 
CP must both meet the Green e® Energy vintage requirements for the year of sale, 
though you are not required to procure and retire a REC and a CP that were actually 
generated simultaneously. 
- RECs and CPs will be minted and tracked in ERCOT, once the first quarter of 
generation is rep orted in generators’ ERCOT accounts. Retirement or transfer of 
RECs and CPs must be substantiated through ERCOT reports and Tracking 
Attestations by following the methodology laid out in Requirements for Using 
Tracking Systems in Green e® Energy Annual Ver ification. 
- 25 The details and dates below are current as of the time of publication of this Standard. However, CPs must be 
retired if they are issued for generation beyond these dates. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 25 
A.2 RGGI State Set Aside (CT, DE, ME, MD, MA, NH, NJ, NY, RI, VT) 
Provisions for Voluntary Renewable Energy Sales and Green e® Energy Eligibility; 
December 5, 2008; updated in September 2024 
- Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative Summary 
- States in the Northeast and Mid Atlantic (Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland, 
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island and Vermont) 
have agreed to take part in the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI), a regional 
capandtrade program for greenhouse gas emissions arising from the electricity 
sector in those states, commencing January 1, 2009. RGGI policies affect certifi ed 
sales of renewable energy made within RGGI states, as well as eligibility for Green e® 
Energy Certificat ion of the sale of renewable energy generated in RGGI states but 
sold outside of RGGI states. 
- This Standard currently requires that bundled renewable electricity and unbundled 
renewable energy certificates (RECs) (collectively “renewable MWh”) contain their 
full CO 2 emissions reduction benefits. In a region where the emissions from the 
electric power sector are capped, certain policy provisions must be made to ensure 
that this core tenet of Green e® Energy policy is preserved; otherwise, Green e® 
Energy is unable to certify renewable energy transactions in the capped region. In 
RGGI, seven of the st ates (all of the above except Delaware, Maryland, and New 
Jersey) have adopted a provision that allows retail voluntary market sales of 
renewable MWh that are generated in a RGGI state and sold into a RGGI state other 
than Delaware, Maryland, and New Jersey to have CO 2 emissions allowances retired 
on behalf of the sales. The rules and mechanisms for retiring emissions allowances 
on behalf of retail voluntary renewable energy sales are referred to as set aside 
provisions. 
- Under these seven states’ rules, renewable MWh can maintain their CO 2 emissions 
avoidance value through the retirement of RGGI emissions allowances on their 
behalf. This will allow these renewable MWh to retain their Green e® Energy 
eligibility, as they will prevent a certain amount of CO 2 from being emitted under the 
cap. Accordingly, in states that do not retire allowances on behalf of the voluntary 
renewable energy market, sales of renewable MWh will not be credited with any CO 2 
emissions reduction benefits under the emissions cap, and thus will not be 
considered eligible for Green e® Energy certification. 
- Each of the eight states has developed its own requirements for the process of 
retiring allowances on behalf of retail voluntary renewable MWh sales, and these 
requirements must be followed in order to ensure that such transactions remain 
eligible for Green e® Energy certification, and that retirement of such renewable 
MWh allows for the ability to make the valid environmental claim that purchasers 
expect. In response to the creation of these state specific policies, the Green e® 
Energy Program has created additional rules to maintain the requirements of this 
Standard. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 26 These Green e® Energy rules are listed below, and went into effect for Green e® 
Energy certified sales on January 1, 2009. Because RGGI policies are enforceable by 
law, Green e® Energy cannot offer grandfathering of any affected Green e® Energy 
rules. New states may join and currently participating states may leave RGGI. Such 
changes will be addressed in future versions of this Standard accordingly. 
- Green e® Energy fully supports set aside provisions for renewable energy sales in 
these RGGI states as a leading example of how cap andtrade can preserve the 
emissions reduction benefits of the voluntary renewable energy market. Sellers of 
RGGI renewable MWh into the RGGI states with voluntary renewable energy set 
aside provisions must follow states’ rules in order to ensure that voluntary renewable 
energy sales retain their full value. 
- Due to the RGGI rules addressing the treatment of voluntary renewable energy 
purchases, renewable energy from eligible generators located in RGGI states 
(including Delaware, Maryland, and New Jersey) can only be Green e® Energy 
certified if sold to end use customers located in the seven RGGI states that have 
voluntary renewable energy set aside provisions. Such customers may still 
purchase Green e® Energy certified renewable MWh generated outside of RGGI 
states. Please read all of the text below for important rules regarding the treatment 
of renewable MWh generated and sold in RGGI states. 
- Green e® Energy Policy Changes Arising from RGGI Rules 
- Renewable MWh sold in Green e® Energy certified transactions must meet the 
eligibility definitions determined by both the state of the sale and this Standard. In 
the case where one set of rules is more stringent than the other, the more stringent 
rules must be followed. 
- A summary table of the following rules is provided at the end of this document. 
- Wholesale versus Retail Sales of RGGI Renewable MWh 
Because there is no mechanism in RGGI for wholesale transactions of renewable 
MWh generated in RGGI states to have CO 2 emissions allowances retired on their 
behalf, Green e® Energy can no longer certify wholesale transactions of renewable 
MWh generated in RGGI states. 
- Geographic Eligibility within and outside of RGGI 
Because a renewable MWh generated in a RGGI state must have CO 2 emissions 
allowances retired on its behalf to meet Green e® Energy requirements, RGGI 
renewable MWh that are sold in Delaware, Maryland, or New Jersey or outside of 
RGGI are not eligible for Green e® Energy certification. See Table 1 for Green e® 
Energy eligibility of RGGI renewable MWh inside and outside of RGGI. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 27 Table A1: Green e® Energy Eligibility by Location of Generation and Location of 
Retail Sale26 
- Renewable MWh sold to retail customers in: 
- CT, ME, MA, NH, NY, RI, 
VT DE, MD, NJ, and all Non 
RGGI states 
Renewable 
MWh 
generated 
in: RGGI state Must get allowance to be 
eligible Ineligible, since no 
allowance available 
All other 
states Eligible; no RGGI 
allowance necessary Eligible; no RGGI allowance 
necessary 
- Generator Operational Date (“New Date”) Definitions 
The Green e® Energy eligibility New Date described in section II.E of this Standard 
remains in effect, with the following exceptions. If the New Date is later than any of 
the online date requirements below, the Green e® Energy New Date is applicable 
over the particular state’s date. 
- Vermont: The Green e® Energy New Date applies, or eligible MWh must qualify as 
Massachusetts or Connecticut new renewables. 
- Additional State Restrictions and Considerations 
Delaware, Maryland, and New Jersey: Green e® Energy will not certify sales of 
renewable MWh generated in RGGI states and sold into Delaware, Maryland, and 
New Jersey, because these states do not have a set aside provision for voluntary 
renewable energy sales. Renewable MWh generated in Delaware, Mar yland, and 
New Jersey and sold into one of the other seven RGGI states may be eligible for 
Green e® Energy certification, provided that those MWh meet the eligibility 
requirements of that RGGI state. 
- State Renewable Resource Type 
Each RGGI state has its own definitions of which types of renewable resources will be 
eligible to have allowances retired on their behalf. 
- In order for a ny sale or for sales to be Green e® Energy certified , the renewable MWh 
sold must come from facilities that meet the resource eligibility definitions of both 
the Green e® Energy program and the RGGI state into which the renewable MWh 
was sold. 
- Maine: Renewables sold in the state must meet the definition of Maine Class I 
renewables in the Maine Portfolio Requirement 65 407 CMR Chapter 311. For Green 
e® Energy purposes, this means that renewable MWh generated by facilities with 
nameplate capacities of over 100MW may not be sold as Green e® Energy certified in 
Maine. Fuel cells, biomass and municipal solid waste may be eligible if they meet this 
Standard but may not be eligible in all cases. 
- 26 Other sections of this document may contain state or region specific rules that should also be considered when determining 
eligibility based on generator or customer location. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 28 Massachusetts: Renewables sold in Massachusetts must meet the state’s RPS Class I 
definition of renewable energy generating sources as well as Green e® Energy 
eligibility rules. Therefore, hydroelectric facilities that are above 25MW in capacity are 
not eligible; hydroelectric facilities must be Low Impact Hydropower Institute 
certified; biomass from wood sources are only eligible if the wood sources can be 
shown to meet Green e® Energy’s criteria for being waste wood; marine or 
hydrokinetic energy is not e ligible; a Class I renewable generating source may be 
located behind the customer meter within the ISO NE control area if the output is 
verified by an independent verification system participating in the NEPOOL GIS 
accounting system and approved by the Mas sachusetts Department of Energy 
Resources. 
- New Hampshire: Rules mirror the standard RGGI resource type rules, except that 
certain restrictions on biomass apply. Class III and IV renewables are not eligible. No 
methane or solar water heating is allowed for use in Green e® Energy certified sales, 
despite being eligible for the state’s set aside in general. 
- New York: For renewable MWh from hydro sold in New York to be eligible for Green 
e® Energy certification, the hydro facility must be certified by the Low Impact 
Hydropower Institute. 
- Vermont: Hydroelectric facilities over 200MW in capacity are ineligible. Solid waste 
must be agricultural or silvicultural waste in order to be eligible. CT Class I and MA 
qualifying unit resource definitions are acceptable in Vermont as well; see those 
state’s requirements for their specific eligibilities. 
- Generator Location Eligibility 
Similar to above, the geographic eligibility requirements of both Green e® Energy 
and the RGGI state into which the renewable MWh was sold must be met in order 
for the renewable MWh sale to be Green e® Energy certified. While Green e® Energy 
does not have geographic requirements for RECs, if Green e® Energy certified 
renewable MWh are used to supply a Green e® Energy certified renewable electricity 
program in a RGGI state, buyers and sellers should be aware of Green e® Energy 
geographic requirements for ele ctricity products. These requirements are available 
in this Standard. 
- Massachusetts: In order for renewable MWh from RGGI states to be eligible in 
Massachusetts, the electricity generated with the renewable MWh must be 
delivered into ISO NE. 
- Vermont: The electricity generated with RECs sold into Vermont must be imported 
into ISO NE. 
- Tracking System Use for RGGI Compliance 
Maine: In order to have allowances retired for voluntary renewable energy sales, 
documentation provided to the state’s environmental agency must be derived from 
data from a tracking system if possible; there are some eligible generators in Maine 
that are o utside the footprint of the NEPOOL GIS tracking system that may provide 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 29 data from the entity that oversees the electricity transmission system in a 
generator’s area. 
- New York: Sellers of RGGI RECs into New York must create a RGGI CO2 Allowance 
Tracking System (COATS) account. 
- Additional Issues Pertaining to RGGI and Green e® Energy Policies 
- Verification and Reporting Timing 
Each RGGI state has developed its own timelines for compliance with its voluntary 
renewable energy set aside provision. These timelines include the date a renewable 
MWh seller must report to the state’s environmental agency, the date the agency 
will retire the allowances, and the date the retirements are actually made. In many 
states, the deadline for reporting retail voluntary sales to the environmental agency 
falls after Green e® Energy’s deadline for delivery of the annual Green e® Energy 
Verification Submission. Green e® Energy is monitoring these state deadlines as they 
are announced and will periodically revise verification protocols and deadlines for 
Green e® Energy certified sales reporting with them in mind. 
- Full Carbon Value and Renewable MWh Sales Exceeding Available Allowances 
Each RGGI state (except Delaware, Maryland, and New Jersey) will put aside a finite 
number of allowances that can be retired on behalf of voluntary renewable MWh 
sales in the state. There is the possibility that the volume of renewable MWh sold in a 
state could exceed the allowances that have been put a side to ensure that each 
renewable MWh can claim its full carbon value. Based on the manner in which 
states’ rules are currently written, there are two possible results in terms of the 
carbon value assigned t o a particular renewable MWh. Either all renewable MWhs 
sold in the state in that year receive the same carbon value, which would be less 
than a renewable MWh would have received if the allowances had not been 
exhausted, or allowances are retired on a firs tcome firstserved basis such that later 
sales receive little or no carbon value. 
- Renewable MWh must be granted their full possible carbon value as prescribed in 
the state voluntary renewable energy set aside provision in order for their sale to be 
eligible for Green e® Energy certification. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 30 Summary of Resulting Green e® Energy Rules 
- State New Date Renewable 
Resources Eligibility Generator 
Location 
Eligibility Where In 
State 
Generation 
Can Be Sold Other Rules and 
Restrictions 
Connecticut Green e® 
Renewable Energy 
Standard for 
Canada and the 
United States Green e® Renewable 
Energy Standard for 
Canada and the 
United States Green e® 
Renewable 
Energy Standard 
for Canada and 
the United 
States RGGI states 
excluding DE, 
MD, and NJ 
Delaware Ineligible 
Maine Green e® 
Renewable Energy 
Standard for 
Canada and the 
United States 100 MW and under 
only Green e® 
Renewable 
Energy Standard 
for Canada and 
the United 
States RGGI states 
excluding DE, 
MD, and NJ NEPOOL GIS must 
be used where 
available in ME 
Maryland Ineligible 
Massachusetts Green e® 
Renewable Energy 
Standard for 
Canada and the 
United States; no 
vintage waivers Hydro over 25 MW 
ineligible; wood 
must be waste 
wood; behind themeter restrictions The electricity 
generated with 
RECs must be 
imported into 
ISONE with the 
RECs RGGI states 
excluding DE, 
MD, and NJ MA Class I 
renewables only. 
New Hampshire Green e® 
Renewable Energy 
Standard for 
Canada and the 
United States No solar water 
heating. No 
methane ; some 
biomass restrictions Green e® 
Renewable 
Energy Standard 
for Canada and 
the United 
States RGGI states 
excluding DE, 
MD, and NJ No Class III or IV 
renewables. 
New York Green e® 
Renewable Energy 
Standard for 
Canada and the 
United States Green e® Renewable 
Energy Standard for 
Canada and the 
United States Green e® 
Renewable 
Energy Standard 
for Canada and 
the United 
States RGGI states 
excluding DE, 
MD, and NJ Seller of RGGI RECs 
into NY must 
create a RGGI CO2 
Allowance Tracking 
System (COATS) 
account. 
New Jersey Ineligible 
Rhode Island Green e® 
Renewable Energy 
Standard for 
Canada and the 
United States Green e® Renewable 
Energy Standard for 
Canada and the 
United States Green e® 
Renewable 
Energy Standard 
for Canada and 
the United 
States RGGI states 
excluding DE, 
MD, and NJ 
Vermont Must qualify as MA 
or CT new 
renewables, or 
Green e® 
Renewable Energy 
Standard for 
Canada and the 
United States No Hydro over 
200MW; no solid 
waste other than ag 
or forestry waste The electricity 
generated with 
RECs must be 
imported into 
ISONE with the 
RECs. RGGI states 
excluding DE, 
MD, and NJ VT also accepts CT 
Class I and MA 
qualifying units: 
see those state’s 
rules 
- Additional information about RGGI state statutes and regulations is available at 
https://www.rggi.org/design/regulations . 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 31 A.3 Hawaii 
Market Advisory and Green e® Energy Policy Update ; July 15, 2010 
- Hawaii’s RPS eligibility rules defined in June 2006 by SB 3185, and revised in the June 
2009 signing of HB 1464, contain language counting all customer sited, grid 
connected renewable electricity towards the RPS by default. This language results in 
a doubl e claim of the renewable attributes of the MWh for any renewable energy 
certificates (RECs) from Hawaii generated since June 2006 sold into the voluntary 
market. 
- The applicable section of the current RPS reads: 
- “Renewable electrical energy” means: 
- (1) Electrical energy generated using renewable energy as the source; and 
(2) Electrical energy savings brought about by: 
(A) The use of renewable displacement or off set technologies, including 
solar water heating, sea water air conditioning district cooling systems, 
solar air conditioning, and customer sited, grid connected renewable 
energy systems; provided that, beginning January 1, 2015, electrical energy 
savings shall not include customer sited, grid connected renewable 
energy systems; 
- According to discussions with the Hawaii PUC, the PUC is interpreting the above 
language as counting all grid connected renewable electricity facilities, including all 
customer sited, grid connected renewable energy systems, toward the state’s RPS 
goal. 
- The full RPS language is available for download here: 
http://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/session2015/bills/HB623_CD1_.HTM 
- The Hawaii PUC does not currently have a mechanism to account for sales of 
voluntary RECs. 
- Resulting Green e® Energy Policy 
- In order to prevent double counting of renewable generation sold in Green e® 
Energy certified products, RECs and renewable electricity generated in Hawaii on or 
after January 1, 2006, are not currently eligible for Green e® Energy certified sales . 
This policy is effective immediately and will remain in effect until further notice. 
- This decision has been made based on discussions with a number of involved 
parties, including the Hawaii PUC, all of whom agreed that this policy addresses the 
issue appropriately and reasonably. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 32 A.4 Michigan 
Market Advisory and Green e® Energy Policy Update; July 15, 2010 
- In October 2008, Public Act 295 (2008 PA 295) was enacted, establishing Michigan’s 
renewable energy standard. Under this act, different types of credits are given to 
renewable electricity generators, in addition to a REC, for the use of different 
technolog ies and in state labor and equipment. “Incentive Renewable Energy 
Credits” (IRECs) can be used by an electric provider to satisfy its renewable portfolio 
standard (RPS) obligations, leaving the REC to be bought by another party, who may 
be buying the REC t o make a voluntary claim outside of any RPS obligation. Any 
party, not just an electric provider, may buy and retire an IREC. However, since both 
the electric provider and the buyer of the REC are claiming the benefits of an 
individual renewable MWh, a dou ble claim occurs. 
- The applicable section of the Act reads: 
- “(2) Subject to subsection (3), the following additional renewable energy credits, 
to be known as Michigan incentive renewable energy credits, shall be granted 
under the following circumstances: 
- (a) 2 renewable energy credits for each megawatt hour of electricity from solar 
power. 
(b) 1/5 renewable energy credit for each megawatt hour of electricity 
generated from a renewable energy system, other than wind, at peak 
demand time as determined by the commission. 
(c) 1/5 renewable energy credit for each megawatt hour of electricity 
generated from a renewable energy system during off peak hours, stored 
using advanced electric storage technology or a hydroelectric pumped 
storage facility, and used during peak hours. However, the number of 
renewable energy credits shall be calculated based on the number of 
megawatt hours of renewable energy used to charge the advanced electric 
storage technology or fill the pumped storage facility, not the number of 
megawatt hours actu ally discharged or generated by discharge from the 
advanced energy storage facility or pumped storage facility. 
(d) 1/10 renewable energy credit for each megawatt hour of electricity 
generated from a renewable energy system constructed using equipment 
made in this state as determined by the commission. The additional credit 
under this subdivision is available for th e first 3 years after the renewable 
energy system first produces electricity on a commercial basis. 
(e) 1/10 renewable energy credit for each megawatt hour of electricity from a 
renewable energy system constructed using a workforce composed of 
residents of this state as determined by the commission. The additional credit 
under this subdivision is availab le for the first 3 years after the renewable 
energy system first produces electricity on a commercial basis.” 
- The Act is available from the Michigan PSC web site, at: 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 33 http://www.michigan.gov/documents/mpsc/2007 SNB 0213_254495_7.pdf 
- Resulting Green e® Energy Policy 
- In order to prevent double counting of renewable generation sold in Green e® 
Energy certified products, Green e® Energy requires that for any MWh of generation 
from Michigan renewable energy facilities, both RECs and a quantity of IRECs 
equivalent to those IRECs generated with the RECs are retired . 
- This policy is effective immediately and will remain in effect until further notice. 
- This requirement allows the entity buying and claiming the REC through a Green e® 
Energy certified sale to make a full renewable energy claim about the particular 
MWh of generation. The REC and the IREC(s) must both meet the Green e® Energy 
vintage requirements for the year of sale, though renewable energy sellers 
participating in Green e® Energy are not required to procure and retire a REC and an 
IREC that were actually generated simultaneously. 
- RECs and IRECs may be minted and tracked in MIRECS, once the first quarter of 
generation is reported in generators’ MIRECS accounts. Retirement or transfer of 
RECs and IRECs must be substantiated through MIRECS reports and Tracking 
Attestations by followin g the methodology laid out in Requirements for Using 
Tracking Systems in Green e® Energy Annual Verification, an appendix to the Green 
e® Energy Verification Instructions . 
- This decision has been made based on discussions with a number of involved 
parties, all of whom agreed that this policy is appropriate to address the threat of 
double counting. 
- A.5 California Greenhouse Gas Cap andTrade 
Program Market Advisory and Green e® Energy Policy Update; December 11, 2012 
- California Greenhouse Gas Cap andTrade Program Summary 
- As one of the strategies to meet California’s Global Warming Solutions Act (AB32), 
California has implemented a cap andtrade program for greenhouse gas emissions 
arising from the electricity sector and other sources. This program commences 
January 1, 2012 , with the first enforceable compliance obligations beginning with 
2013 electricity generation and emissions. The California cap andtrade policies are 
implemented by the California Air Resources Board (ARB), and will affect renewable 
electricity generatio n that either takes place in the state or that is “directly 
delivered”27 into the state. 
- 27 As defined in Section 95102(a) of the ARB’s “Regulation for the Mandatory Reporting of Greenhouse Gas Emissions” 
(Mandatory Reporting Regulation or MRR), available at http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/reporting/ghg rep/ghg rep.htm . As 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 34 
This Standard requires that bundled renewable electricity and unbundled renewable 
energy certificates (RECs) (collectively “renewable MWh”) contain their full CO 2 
emissions reduction benefits. In a region where the emissions from the electric 
power sector are capped, Green e® Energy certification requires that all of the CO 2 
benefits of renewable electricity generation are demonstrably preserved to the 
benefit of the renewable energy buyer. California has adopted a provision that allows 
retail voluntary mar ket sales of renewable MWh that are sourced from in state 
renewable generators, or from facilities that directly deliver electricity to the 
California grid, to have California Greenhouse Gas Emission Allowances retired on 
behalf of the retail purchaser. Th is allowance retirement will enable these renewable 
MWh to retain their Green e® Energy eligibility. The rules and mechanisms for 
retiring allowances on behalf of retail voluntary renewable energy sales are generally 
referred to as “set aside” provisions, and under California’s Cap andTrade program 
rules are called the Voluntary Renewable Energy Program (VREP). 
- In response to the creation of VREP, Green e® Energy must change a number of 
rules to maintain the intent and function of this Standard . These Green e® Energy 
rule changes are listed below, and went into effect for Green e® Energy certified 
sales that were supplied by generation occurring on or after January 1, 2013, 
including sales made in 2012 that were supplied by first quarter 2013 generation. 
- Resulting Green e® Energy Policy 
- Facilities that are eligible for the VREP must follow the rules set forth in Section 1, 
below. Facilities that are in or directly delivering to California that are not VREP 
eligible, but otherwise meet all other relevant Green e® Energy rules, must follow 
Section 2. All facilities must also meet all applicable Green e® Energy eligibility rules 
regardless of VREP eligibility. If the seller of a Green e® Energy certified product is 
also an obligated entity under the California cap andtrade program, allowances 
used for compliance with Green e® Energy rules may not also be used toward the 
seller’s cap andtrade compliance obligation. Proof that allowances were retired 
properly will be required for Green e® Energy verification. 
- RECs generated by facilities that are outside of California and not directly delivering 
to California do not require use of the VREP or allowance retirement in order to be 
eligible for use in Green e® Energy certified sales. 
- of 9/18/2012, the definition is as follows: “Direct delivery of electricity” or “directly delivered” means electricity that 
meets any of the following criteria: (A) The facility has a first point of interconnection with a California balancing 
authority; (B ) The facility has a first point of interconnection with distribution facilities used to serve end users within 
a California balancing authority area; (C) The electricity is scheduled for delivery from the specified source into a 
California balancing autho rity via a continuous transmission path from interconnection of the facility in the 
balancing authority in which the facility is located to a final point of delivery located in the state of California; or (D) 
There is an agreement to dynamically transfer e lectricity from the facility to a California balancing authority.” 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 35 
Table A2: Requirements to Retire a California Eligible Allowance Based on 
Generator Location 
- Renewable Electricity or 
RECs from Facility Located: Allowance Necessary for Eligibility? 
In CA or Directly Delivering to 
CA Yes. Must retire allowance through 
VREP, or retire CA eligible allowances 
separately 
Outside of CA and not 
Directly Delivering to CA No. VREP or CA eligible allowance 
retirement not necessary for eligibility.28 
- Because California cap andtrade policies are required by law, Green e® Energy 
cannot offer grandfathering related to any affected Green e® Energy rules. 
- Determining VREP Eligibility 
VREP eligibility is determined by Section 95841.1 of the ARB’s Final Regulation Order, 
Subchapter 10 Climate Change, Article 5, title 17, California Code of Regulations 
(“Final Regulation Order”), which states that in order to produce VREP eligible MWh, 
generators in or directly delivering to California must be certified as RPS eligible by 
the CEC and have a commercial online date of July 1, 2005 or later, or must meet 
design and installation standards pursuant to the California Energy Commission’s 
(CEC) Gu idelines for California’s Solar Electric Incentive Programs, third edition, June 
2010. The Final Regulation Order is available at: 
http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/capandtrade/capandtrade.htm 
- 1. VREP Eligible Facilities 
Renewable MWh generated by Green e® Energy eligible generators located in or 
directly delivering to California on or after January 1, 2013 can only be Green e® 
Energy certified if allowances set aside for the VREP are retired on their behalf. For 
renewable MWh that meet VREP eligibility requirements (VREP eligible MWh) , 
allowance retirement can occur through VREP reporting. Section 95841.1 of the Final 
Regulation Order provides details on the attestations and other documentation that 
must be included with a VREP application submitted to the ARB. 
- A. Generator Online Dates Must be July 1, 2005 or Later (“New Date” Definition) 
Eligible renewable MWh generated in or directly delivered to California must 
come from facilities that first came online on July 1, 2005 or later in order to be 
eligible for VREP. When the New Date described in Section II.E of th is 
Standard is later than 2005, the Green e® Energy New Date will be applicable 
in place of California’s July 1, 2005 date. 
- B. Renewable Resources must be Eligible under Green e® Energy AND VREP 
Rules 
- 28 If facility is in a RGGI state (Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, 
Rhode Island and Vermont), see Section A.2 of Appendix A of this document. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 36 The renewable MWh sold must come from facilities that meet the resource 
eligibility definitions of both Green e® Energy and the VREP, which refers back 
to the resource definitions of the California Renewables Portfolio Standard 
(RPS). Where one set of rules is more restrictive than the other, the more 
restrictive rules must be followed. Eligibility of any individual generator will be 
determined by considering all the requirements of th is Standard, the CEC’s 
http://www.energy.ca.gov/2012publications/CEC 3002012 002/CEC 3002012 
002CMF.pdf29 and the ARB’s Final Regulation Order. For example, 
hydroelectric facilities over 30 MW in capacity are ineligible if they are located 
in or directly delivering to California.30 Additional restrictions apply to the 
incremental increase in generation resulting from efficiency improvements to 
a hydroelectric facility. Certain additional restrictions on biomass, biodiesel, 
fuel cells and municipal solid waste also apply. 
- C. VREP is not Available for Wholesale Sales, Wholesale Sales Must Include 
Independent Retirement of Allowances 
Because only retail renewable energy transactions are eligible for the VREP, 
ALL Green e® Energy certified wholesale sales of MWh from facilities 
generating in or directly delivering to California MUST follow the instructions 
in Section 2 below to retire California eligible allowances. 
- 2. Facilities Not Eligible for VREP 
Independent retirement of California eligible allowances must be demonstrated for 
Green e® Energy certification of renewable MWh generated in or directly delivering 
to California. The first seller of such MWh in a Green e® Energy certified retail or 
wholesale transaction must demonstrate retirement of California eligible emissions 
allowances31 in amounts in accordance with the ARB’s allowance calculation 
methodology for VREP.32 An account in the “Compliance Instrument Tracking 
System Service” (CITSS) emissions allowance tracking system is necessary in order 
for a Green e® Energy Participant to retire California eligible allowances. 
Alternatively, the seller of a California eligible allowance to a Green e® Energy 
Participant may retire a California eligible allowance on behalf of the Participant’s 
Green e® Energy certified sale. 
- 29 See: http://www.energy.ca.gov/renewables/documents/ 
30 Under limited circumstances the following types of hydropower may be eligible: generation attributable to 
incremental capacity at a hydropower facility over 30MW; and 40MW hydro facilities that are “Operated as Part of a 
Water Supply or Conveyance System” according to the California RPS rules. Hydropower facilities must also comply 
with Section II.A.4 of this Standard. 
31 At the time of publication, only California Greenhouse Gas Emission Allowances are included, but if California links 
with Quebec or other jurisdictions then allowances from a jurisdiction that is accepted for compliance by California 
will also be accepted by Green e Energy. California eligible offsets are NOT included. 
32 See Section 95841.1(c) of the Final Regulation Order for calculation details available at 
http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/capandtrade/capandtrade.htm . The annual Emissions Factor referenced in this section is 
available in Section 95111(b)(1); as of 9/15/2012 this factor is 0.428 MT of CO2e/MWh. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 37 Additional Considerations Pertaining to California and Green e® Energy Policies 
- Verification and Reporting Timing 
According to ARB rules, a renewable MWh end user or seller must report sales of 
MWh generated in a particular year to the ARB no later than July 1 of the year 
following the year of generation. The ARB will accept reporting prior to July 1; early 
reporting is preferred in order to secure VREP allowances and streamline Green e® 
Energy verification . Coupled with Green e® Energy vintage requir ements (see 
Section III.B of this Standard), sellers of Green e® Energy certified products that use 
generation from the second half of the year prior to the sales year must therefore 
report the generation from the prior year in accordance with the ARB’s deadline for 
that prior year of sale. For example, if a seller uses November 2015 generation in a 
2016 Green e® Energy certified sale, the November 2015 generation must be reported 
to the ARB by July 1 of 2016 in order to have allowances retired on its behalf through 
the VREP. Proof of allowance retirement, either through VREP or through separate 
allowance purchase and retirement, must be provided to Green e® Energy by the 
annual Green e® Energy verification submission deadline or within 10 business days 
of the date the ARB notifies the Green e® Energy Participant of VREP retirement, 
whichever is later. 
- Full Carbon Value and Renewable MWh Sales Exceeding VREP Allowance 
Availability 
Each year, California will set aside a finite number of allowances through VREP that 
can be retired on behalf of sales of eligible voluntary renewable MWh from that year. 
The ARB will allocate VREP allowances on a first come first served basis, and there i s 
the possibility that the volume of eligible renewable MWh sold and reported to VREP 
could exceed the equivalent amount of VREP allowances necessary to ensure that 
each renewable MWh can claim its full carbon value. If the VREP has been fully 
subscribed, and there are no allowances remaining for VREP eligible renewable 
MWh, it is up to the seller to procure and retire allowances in an amount equal to 
what the CA ARB would have retired had there been sufficient allowances in the 
VREP; see footnote 16 for ca lculation details. 
- Attestations and Reporting Requirements 
California requires certain attestations are made by those applying for allowance 
retirement under VREP, and also has various program requirements pertaining to 
the data and reports that must be submitted to qualify for VREP. It is recommended 
that renewab le energy sellers seeking allowance retirement in California read 
through the full set of requirements, in Section 95841.1 of the Final Regulation Order 
or call the ARB hotline at (916) 322 2037. 
- Updates to California Regulations 
The California Air Resources Board and California Energy Commission might at any 
time undertake processes to update or change rules that may affect the VREP rules. 
Green e® Energy rules will have to adapt to these changes, in most cases without 
providing sellers of affected renewable MWh the flexibility of grandfathering or 
generous notice. To stay informed of pending comment periods and updates, the 
ARB and CEC provide the following resources: 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 38 • ARB Cap andTrade provides a listserv: 
http://www.arb.ca.gov/listserv/listserv_ind.php?listname=capandtrade 
- CEC listserv sign up: http://www.energy.ca.gov/listservers/ 
- A.6 Arizona 
Market Advisory and Green e® Energy Policy Update; July 14, 2015 
- Generation in the Footprints of Electricity Providers Subject to the Arizona 
Renewable Energy Standard and Tariff (REST) 
- On December 31, 2014, the Arizona Corporation Commission (ACC) released Decision 
no. 74882, which provides a resolution to the reporting challenge that public service 
corporations serving retail electric load in Arizona (“Affected Utilities,” excluding any 
Utility Distribution Company with more than half of its customers located outside of 
Arizona) faced in meeting the distributed generation (DG) portion of the state’s 
Renewable Energy Standard and Tariff (REST). With this decision, the ACC adopted 
language that specifically allows Commissioners to consider null power when 
determining REST compliance. 
- Selected language from Decision No. 74882 that affects Green e® Participants 
follows: 
- “Amend [section] § 1812(B)(l) to expand the specific information to be reported 
annually by a utility to include kWhs of energy produced within its service territory 
for which the affected utility does not own the associated RECs, which must be 
differentia ted from the kWhs of energy for which the affected utility does own the 
RECs; and” 
- “Amend [section] § 1812(C) to allow the Commission to ‘consider all available 
information’ to determine whether an affected utility’s compliance report satisfies 
the REST rules.” 
- This ACC decision applies to compliance reports filed in 2015 and thereafter, and 
includes generation that occurred in 2014. The rule requires an Affected Utility to 
report all kWh of energy produced within the Affected Utility’s service territory. This 
decision gives the ACC discretion over whether to consider null power generated in 
the geographic footprint of Affected Utilities when evaluating the compliance status 
of the utility which could effectively count RECs generated within the Affected 
Utility fo otprint, but not owned by the utility. 
- Resulting Green e® Energy Policy 
- Green e® Energy Participants using RECs generated in the footprint of Affected 
Utilities subject to the REST (including, but not limited to, Arizona Public Service 
[APS] and Tucson Electric Power [TEP]) must follow the steps below in order to 
maintain REC eligibil ity for a Green e® Energy certification. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 39 
If a category of the REST is not being met with utility owned and retired RECs, but 
the utility is considered to be in compliance with the REST, Green e® Energy may 
regard at least that category of the RECs to be ineligible. 
- If these steps are not followed, RECs generated in Arizona Affected Utilities’ 
footprints are not eligible for use in Green e® Energy certified products. 
- 1. Participant Must Obtain a Copy of the Relevant Affected Utility REST Report 
The REST report must be submitted during Green e® Energy verification and 
must: 
- A. Subtract out the MWh associated with RECs proposed for Green e® Energy 
certification before total generation is reported 
B. Contain (e.g. in a table) a listing for each source of generation that clearly 
shows whether the RECs were used towards REST compliance 
C. Include a statement identifying the MWh that are subtracted out (identified in 
1.A above) and that those MWh were not counted towards REST compliance. 
(As an example: “Green Product sales are subtracted from total Renewable 
Generation, and do not count tow ard compliance with REST targets.”) 
Participants must demonstrate through the REST report or ACC statement that only 
utility owned RECs were used for REST compliance and that the subtracted out 
MWh (identified in 1 )A above) were not included in the compliance evaluation. 
- During the Green e® Energy annual verification process, the Participant’s auditor will 
review and report on information contained in the utility REST report, and may seek 
additional information when necessary to ensure the RECs put forward for 
verification have not been cons idered as part of RPS compliance. 
- 2. Verification and Reporting Timing 
The utility REST report must be delivered to CRS as soon as possible after ACC staff 
evaluates REST compliance and no later than the deadline for annual verification 
materials (typically June 1). 
- A.7 Quebec Greenhouse Gas Cap andTrade 
Market Advisory and Green e® Energy Policy Update; December 3, 2018 
- Québec introduced a cap andtrade program in 2012 with compliance obligation 
beginning on January 1, 2013. Québec formally linked its greenhouse gas emissions 
trading system with the state of California on January 1, 2014. The Québec cap andtrade policy is implemented by the Ministère du Développement durable, de 
l’Environnement et de la Lutte contre les changements climatiques and affects 
renewable electricity generation that either takes place in the province or that is 
“directly delivered” into the province. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 40 This Standard requires that bundled renewable electricity and unbundled renewable 
energy certificates (RECs; collectively “renewable MWh”) contain their full CO 2 
emissions reduction benefits. In a region where the emissions from the electric 
power sector are capped, Green e® Energy certification requires that all of the CO 2 
benefits of renewable electricity generation are demonstrably preserved to the 
benefit of the renewable energy buyer. To date, Canadian provinces with cap andtrade programs covering the electricity sector have not adopted, or do not have 
plans to adopt, a provision known as a “voluntary renewable energy set aside,” which 
would permit retirements of emissions allowances on behalf of retail voluntary 
market sales of renewable MWh that are generated in the province. 
- In response to the implementation of the cap andtrade programs, Green e® Energy 
must change a number of rules to maintain the intent and function of th is Standard . 
- Resulting Green e® Energy Policy 
- Facilities that are in or directly delivering to Quebec that otherwise meet all other 
relevant Green e® Energy rules must follow the rules below. All facilities must also 
meet all applicable Green e® Energy eligibility rules. If the seller of a Green e® Energy 
certified product is also an obligated entity under Quebec ’s cap andtrade program, 
allowances used for compliance with Green e® Energy rules may not also be used 
toward the seller’s cap andtrade compliance obligation. Proof that allowances were 
retired properly will be required for Green e® Energy verif ication. 
- Independent retirement of eligible allowances33 must be demonstrated for Green e® 
Energy certification of renewable MWh generated in or directly delivering into 
Quebec . Each seller of such MWh in a Green e® Energy certified retail or wholesale 
transaction must demonstrate that eligible emissions allowances were retired in 
amounts in accordance with the methodology provided annually during Green e® 
Energy verification.34 
- An account in the relevant emissions allowance tracking system is necessary in 
order for a Green e® Energy Participant to retire eligible allowances. For Québec 
generation, the relevant tracking system is the “Compliance Instrument Tracking 
System Service” (CITSS). Alternatively, the seller of an eligible allowance to a Green e® 
Energy Participant may retire an eligible allowance on behalf of the Participant’s 
Green e® Energy certified sale. 
- 33 At the time of publication, California and Québec’s carbon markets are linked, meaning that California and Québec Greenhouse 
Gas Emission Allowances may be used for Québec generation. Should other jurisdictions link to this market, then allowances fr om 
the jurisdictions that are accepted for compli ance by Quebec will also be accepted by Green e Energy. California or Province 
specific eligible offsets are NOT included. 
34 Information pertaining to emissions allowances in association with Canadian Greenhouse Gas Cap andTrade programs can be 
found on the Green e Participant Portal at www.green e.org. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 41 A.8 Washington Greenhouse Gas Cap andTrade 
Market Advisory and Green e® Energy Policy Update; December 15, 2022 
- Washington has implemented a cap andinvest program for greenhouse gas 
emissions arising from the electricity sector and other sources. This program 
commences January 1, 20 23, with the first enforceable compliance obligations 
beginning with 20 23 electricity generation and emissions. Washington’s capandinvest policies are implemented by the Department of Ecology (DOE ) and will affect 
renewable electricity generation that either takes place in the state or that is 
“directly delivered” into the state. 
- This Standard requires that bundled renewable electricity and unbundled renewable 
energy certificates (RECs) (collectively “renewable MWh”) contain their full CO 2 
emissions reduction benefits. In a region where the emissions from the electric 
power sector are capped, Green e® Energy certification requires that all of the CO 2 
benefits of renewable electricity generation are demonstrably preserved to the 
benefit of the renewable energy buyer. Washington has adopted a provision that 
allows retail voluntary mar ket sales of renewable MWh that are sourced from in 
state renewable generators, or from facilities that directly deliver electricity to the 
Washington grid, to have Washington Greenhouse Gas Emission Allowances retired 
on behalf of the retail purchaser through a “ voluntary renewable reserve account” . 
This allowance retirement will enable these renewable MWh to retain their Green e® 
Energy eligibility. The rules and mechanisms for retiring allowances on behalf of 
retail voluntary renewable energy sales are g enerally referred to as “set aside” 
provisions . 
- In response to the creation of the Voluntary renewable reserve account , Green e® 
Energy must change a number of rules to maintain the intent and function of this 
Standard. These Green e® Energy rule changes are listed below and went into effect 
for Green e® Energy certified sales that were supplied by generation occurring on or 
after January 1, 20 23, including sales made in 20 22 that were supplied by first quarter 
2023 generation. 
- Resulting Green e® Energy Policy 
- Facilities that are in or directly delivering to Washington that otherwise meet all 
other relevant Green e® Energy rules must follow the rules below. All facilities must 
also meet all applicable Green e® Energy eligibility rules. If the seller of a Green e® 
Energy certified product is also an obligated entity under Washington ’s cap andinvest program, allowances used for compliance with Green e® Energy rules may not 
also be used toward the seller’s cap andinvest compliance obligation. Proof that 
allowances were retired properly will be required for Green e® Energy verification. 
- Renewable MWh generated by Green e® Energy eligible generators with a 
commercial online date of January 1, 2020 or after that are located in or directly 
delivering to Washington can only be used for a Green e® Energy certified product if 
allowances are retired on their behalf. For renewable MWh that meet eligibility 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 42 requirements, allowance retirement can occur through voluntary renewable reserve 
account reporting to the Department of Ecology. Proof of allowance retirement, 
either through the voluntary renewable reserve account or through separate 
allowance purchase an d retirement, must be provided to Green e® Energy by the 
annual Green e® Energy verification submission deadline. Each seller of such MWh in 
a Green e® Energy certified retail or wholesale transaction must demonstrate that 
eligible emissions allowances wer e retired in amounts in accordance with the 
methodology provided annually during Green e® Energy verification. 
- Generators with a commercial online date before January 1, 2020 were included in 
the baseline assessment for cap compliance and do not require allowances to be 
retired on behalf of their generation. 
- A.9 North Carolina 
Market Advisory and Green e® Energy Policy Update; March 28, 2023 
- In 2021 North Carolina signed into law the “Energy Solutions for North Carolina” 
carbon reduction bill. This law requires that electric generating facilities owned or 
operated by public utilities (I.e. Duke Energy) achieve a 70% reduction in emissions 
of carbon dioxide from 2005 levels by 2030. The scoping plan included as part of the 
emissions baseline all facilities built prior to January 1, 2023. According to 
discussions with the North Carolina PUC and Duke Energy, the PUC and Duke 
Energy are counti ng Duke Energy all owned generation toward compliance and will 
not maintain regulatory surplus by removing emissions avoided by voluntary 
renewable energy (VRE) generation from its emissions calculations. This results in a 
double claim of the renewable at tributes of the MWh for any renewable energy 
certificates (RECs) from Duke owned generators built on January 1, 2023 or after that 
sell into the voluntary market. 
- Resulting Green e Energy Policy 
- In order to prevent double counting of renewable generation sold in Green e® 
Energy certified products, RECs and renewable electricity generated by Duke 
Energy owned generators in North Carolina from facilities built on or after January 1, 
2023 are not cur rently eligible for Green e® Energy certified sales , this includes the 
45% of MWh from third party solar developed pursuant to HB 951, of which Duke 
purchases the energy and environmental attributes. This policy is effective 
immediately and will remain in effect until further notice. 
- A.10 Oregon 
Market Advisory and Green e® Energy Policy Update; January 29, 2024 
- On January 5, 2024, the Oregon Public Utilities Commission adopted an Order (No. 
24002) on issues related to the implementation of HB 2021, the Oregon Clean 
Energy Targets bill. The bill requires that retail electricity providers meet targets to 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 43 reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions associated with the electricity sold to retail 
electricity consumers as reported to the Oregon Department of Environmental 
Quality (DEQ). 
- The Order states that RECs will not be required for compliance with HB 2021. It also 
states that HB 2021 compliance is not understood to constitute a claim to have 
delivered renewable energy to an end user. However, the Commission does not 
make a determina tion about whether HB 2021 delivers retail GHG claims to Oregon 
customers, i.e. whether HB 2021 compliance reduces emissions associated with 
electricity delivered to retail consumers in Oregon and therefore constitutes a claim 
for Oregon retail consumers r egarding the emissions associated with the electricity 
they use. As a result, the emissions attributes of renewable energy used for HB 2021 
compliance will likely be claimed for Oregon customers and there may be 
disaggregation of the REC or double counting of the emissions attribute if the RECs 
associated with generation reported to DEQ are sold to voluntary renewable energy 
customers or used for other programs in other states. 
- In addition, the Order confirms that RECs associated with electricity procured by 
entities for compliance with HB 2021 are not surplus to regulation and these entities 
must disclose when selling off those RECs that the generation is still reported as 
emiss ions free to DEQ. 
- While the emission reduction target dates in the law are 2030, 2035, and 2040, the 
Commission clarifies in the Order that the basis for compliance is annual emissions 
reporting to the DEQ. 
- The Oregon PUC Order is available at 
https://apps.puc.state.or.us/orders/2024ords/24 002.pdf (see pg. 5 17). 
- Resulting Green e® Energy Policy 
This policy is effective until further notice. 
- Starting with Jan 1, 2024 generation, RECs associated with generation reported to 
the Oregon DEQ for compliance with Oregon HB2021 (2021) are not eligible for use in 
a Green e® certified renewable energy product. 
- For the sake of clarity, this policy also applies to generation located outside of 
Oregon and products sold to customers outside of Oregon. For example, if a utility 
bought bundled renewable electricity from Washington state and reported that 
electricity t o the Oregon DEQ for compliance with HB2021, the associated 
Washington RECs would not be eligible under the Green e® Standard. 
- Green e® Renewable Energy Standard for Canada and the United States 
© 2024 Center for Resource Solutions. All rights reserved. 44 
- NOTICE: This Standard is the copyrighted property of Center for Resource Solutions 
(CRS). It cannot be copied, reprinted or used in any way without permission of CRS. If 
you wish to obtain permission to use our copyrighted materials, please contact CRS 
at +1 4155612100 or info@resource solutions.org . 
-