RCRA Renewable Energy Siting Checklist 
Page | 1 Process Checklist 
RCRA Renewable Energy Siting 
The following checklist provides a ﬂexible guide for integrating renewable energy development 
activities into the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act cleanup process. Conditions speciﬁc to 
each facility may lead to implementing some key considerations during steps that differ from those 
speciﬁed below. 
4.Operat e &
Maintain
1.Facility
Conditions
2.Integrate
Design
3.Implement
Cleanup
Step 1: Screen Facility and Environmental Conditions 
- Is my facility large enough for renewable energy?
The REPowering Mapper is a useful resource to identify favorable conditions for renewable 
development on speciﬁc facilities . The REPowering Tracking Matrix has examples o f renewable 
energy developed on RCRA facilities . While most renewable energy developments require at least 5 
acres to generate 1 MW of power, smaller RCRA facilities where a portion of operations may continue 
during and after cleanup may accommodate smaller scale renewable energy projects. 
- Are the local solar o r other e nergy r esources sufficient to support 
renewable energy?
All facilities under consideration should be screened for basic resource potential before they are 
considered for renewable development. Some renewable uses, such as biomass or geothermal 
energy projects, may require more in depth and speciﬁc assessments. The National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory (NREL) maintains useful energy resource maps with national scale data to 
evaluate solar and wind resources. 
- Is cleanup needed at the facility ? Who is the lead cleanup agency?
While some RCRA Corrective Action facilities will undergo cleanup and continue operations, other 
facilities or portions of facilities might not continue current operations and can offer 
opportunities for reuse. Certain parcels may not be contaminated or may be cleaned up on a 
shorter timeline than the entire facility. Parcels can be cleaned up and reused even while other 
portions of the property continue to operate as a regulated facility or continue to undergo corrective 
actions. It is important to consider how ongoing operations may affec t siting future renewable energy 
structures, including access and operations of the renewable energy development . 
At the federal level, corrective action may take place under a RCRA permit or as an enforcement order under §3008 of RCRA. In authorized states, corrective action s may take place under a state 
issued RCRA permit, a state cleanup order, a state voluntary cleanup program, or another state cleanup authority. Since authorized states may use a combination of state authorities to compel or oversee corrective actions, facility owners and developers must work closely with their state agency 
at each step of the cleanup process to best determine integrating renewable energy development at RCRA C orrective Action facilities . The RE Powering M apper contains point ofinformation contacts 
for many facilities . 
RCRA Renewable Energy Siting Checklist 
Page | 2 ☐Have you confirmed the willingness of facility owners and the community to 
consider renewable energy development? Are there any local moratoriums on 
new renewable energy projects?
It is critical that the reuse of a facility matches both community priorities for redevelopment and 
remains protective of human health and the environment in the long term. Discuss the potential 
development with facility managers or project ofﬁcers, the community , and local government to 
conﬁrm willingness to consider renewable energy at the facility and work to integrate renewable 
energy into local redevelopment planning efforts . 
- Identify p otential non contaminated areas based on sampling results and confirm 
suitability of the facility for renewable energy.
The RCRA Facility Investigation (RFI) step provides a detailed site investigation to understand 
the nature, extent, and potential migration of the contaminant release, if any. Use site sampling 
and risk assessment results and from the RFI to identify the best potential locations for 
renewable energy development . Areas that have been sampled and are ready for reuse without 
interim measures or cleanup actions may be considered for renewable energy development 
immediately. 
Consider the terrain conditions and climate concerns that may impact the long term 
protectiveness of a remedy and the operations and maintenance of the renewable facility. Are 
there project preparation concerns, such as shading or leveling the ground, that could be 
considered during the corrective measures implementation phase that could improve 
renewable energy feasibility? 
The RFI step occurs before remedial decisions are made and is an ideal time for stakeholders to begin 
planning for renewable energy development. If interim measures are used to control or abate ongoing 
risks , discuss the potential for renewable energy at the facility . There is no uniform timeframe for the 
investigation phase , and the process could take several years. Renewable energy developers should 
understand how long the remedial investigation is expected to take at their sites when establishing a 
site control strategy . This will help ensure that site control options or other contract mechanisms 
extend sufﬁciently long and will help avoid undue ﬁnancial commitments by the developer before the 
investigation phase is complete . 
- Have you evaluated the project economics of a renewable project at the facility ?
What are the approximate local wholesale and retail prices for electricity?
A renewable energy project’s economic feasibility can depend on many factors, including permitting 
requirements, transmission or distribution interconnection locations, technology and complexity, and 
local electricity prices. The environmental conditions at the facility , cleanup necessary, and 
associated timeline for cleanup are also important factors impacting the economic feasibility of a development. Incorporate the ﬁndings of the RFI, any interim measures, Corrective Measures Study 
(CMS), and the Remed y Selection reports into the renewable energy development timeline and the 
impacts to the renewable energy cost analysis. 
- RCRA Renewable Energy Siting Checklist 
Page | 3 Step 2: Integrate Renewable Design, Cleanup , and Reuse Planning 
- Incorporate Renewable Energy into Cleanup and Reuse Planning
Conduct a detailed analysis on ways to incorporate renewable energy design requirements into 
the cleanup process in collaboration with appropriate state, Tribal, or local ofﬁcials as needed 
(e.g., solar panel integrated landﬁll caps). Coordinate discussions about reuse of the facility 
with community members and local government staff to ensure renewable energy is a desired outcome and ﬁts with the reuse plans for the facility . 
- Have you considered any Institutional Controls or other limitations required by
cle
anup into renewable design?
Take note of any engineering or institutional controls (ECs and ICs) required by CMS at the facility . 
Consider these controls in the renewable energy design, including soil grading/disturbance , slope, 
cap or cover design, stormwater management, soil stability, and anchoring. 
Conﬁrm that the design, operations, and maintenance of the renewable energy facility will not 
interfere with any remedial activities (e.g., groundwater monitoring sampling, extraction well 
operation, remedy operations and maintenance ), ongoing operations at the facility , ICs, and /or ECs in 
place. Ensure that ECs and/or ICs comply with renewable energy leases or other agreements. Finally, 
work with regulators to consider renewable energy development along with permit changes, if 
needed. 
Renewable energy could be discussed during the evaluation of remedy options, especially if 
renewables would be proposed as a part of the remedy. Once a remedy is selected, it becomes more difficult to incorporate into the cleanup. Additionally, there may be no cleanup required on 
parts of the facility, based on the RFI results . This step provides an opportunity to incorporate 
renewable energy reuse options in areas of the facility where cleanup is not taking place or as a 
future use for the property when the cleanup is complete. 
- Continue Stakeholder Engagement Activities
As the cleanup and reuse planning and design activities of the r enewable energy project continues , 
invest time in community meetings and other public outreach with local governments to keep 
stakeholders informed and involved as appropriate. Many projects require land use review by local 
departments such as planning review boards or other permitting bodies, and projects should 
consider the necessary approval requirement s when estimating project periods and associated risks. 
Consider opportunities to participate, as appropriate, in public meetings held during the Corrective 
Action or local reuse planning process to respond to any community concerns as they arise on the 
integration of renewable energy into the cleanup. 
- Identify Renewable E nergy S pecific Budget and Process Approvals and Permits
With the ﬁnal cleanup plan in hand, ﬁnalize the design for the renewable energy project. Gather 
ﬁnal cost information on constructing a renewable energy facility separate from the cleanup 
budget. Determine longterm ownership with state, local, and EPA partners and decide the 
ownership structure for the renewable energy project. 
- RCRA Renewable Energy Siting Checklist 
Page | 4 Assist the renewable developer to determine what permits are necessary and what 
environmental, engineering, or other studies are recommended. Permits , such as land use, 
environmental, siting, building, or other permits, may be required. Review applications for 
interconnection and net metering agreements to the appropriate local utility. 
Step 3: Cleanup and Renewable Energy Project Implementation 
- Are you actively coordinating construction activities across the cleanup and
ren
ewable energy teams?
Hold regular meetings between the cleanup team (e.g., state regulators, EPA, other contractors) and 
the renewable energy development team to examine ways to coordinate construction activities. 
Consider including community or local government stakeholders to minimize the impacts of 
construction activities on communities. 
Renewable energy development can begin progressively in areas where cleanup activities are 
complete or where cleanup is not required . During cleanup, renewable energy development should 
not interfere with the implementation and protectiveness of the C orrective Measures 
Implementation (CMI) process. 
- Have you confirmed that ECs and ICs are in place?
Inspect cleanup and renewable energy infrastructure to ensure the cleanup protectiveness is not compromised during any construction. Conﬁrm that the ECs and ICs for the facility are in place and 
are being followed. 
Step 4: Post Cleanup and Operations 
- Ensure Remedy Protectiveness is Intact
Inspect cleanup infrastructure to ensure the protectiveness of the cleanup is not compromised by 
renewable energy development activities. 
- Negotiate a Site Access and Cooperation Agreement
Collaborate with the developers and the owner and/or permittee to negotiate a nd ﬁnalize 
various access and cooperation provisions into the lease agreement . The agreement will outline 
how access and land use for operations and ma intenance of the energy facility and ongoing 
environmental monitoring activities will be managed by cooperating entities over the entire term of the 
lease. The lease term is often at least as long as a ny associated energy agreement (e.g., power 
purchase agreement). 
- Have you checked that ECs and ICs are in place and being a dhered to?
Ensure that ECs and ICs are being adhered to as the renewable energy project operates and 
that the operations do not interfere with any other monitoring or operations and maintenance 
(O&M) activities.